Review
An Insight of Deep Learning Based Demand Forecasting in
Smart Grids

Javier Manuel Aguiar-Pérez *

and María Ángeles Pérez-Juárez

Departamento de Teoría de la Señal y Comunicaciones e Ingeniería Telemática, Universidad de Valladolid,
ETSI Telecomunicación, Paseo de Belén 15, 47011 Valladolid, Spain
* Correspondence: javagu@tel.uva.es

Abstract: Smart grids are able to forecast customers’ consumption patterns, i.e., their energy demand,
and consequently electricity can be transmitted after taking into account the expected demand. To
face today’s demand forecasting challenges, where the data generated by smart grids is huge, modern
data-driven techniques need to be used. In this scenario, Deep Learning models are a good alternative
to learn patterns from customer data and then forecast demand for different forecasting horizons.
Among the commonly used Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Long Short-Term Memory networks—based
on Recurrent Neural Networks—are playing a prominent role. This paper provides an insight into
the importance of the demand forecasting issue, and other related factors, in the context of smart
grids, and collects some experiences of the use of Deep Learning techniques, for demand forecasting
purposes. To have an efﬁcient power system, a balance between supply and demand is necessary.
Therefore, industry stakeholders and researchers should make a special effort in load forecasting,
especially in the short term, which is critical for demand response.

Keywords: demand forecasting; load forecasting; demand response; forecasting horizon; smart grid;
smart environment; Deep Learning; Long Short-Term Memory networks; Convolutional Neural Networks

Citation: Aguiar-Pérez, J.M.;

Pérez-Juárez, M.Á. An Insight of

Deep Learning Based Demand

Forecasting in Smart Grids. Sensors

2023, 23, 1467. https://doi.org/

10.3390/s23031467

Academic Editors: Hossam

A. Gabbar and Fco Javier Rodríguez

Received: 27 November 2022

Revised: 9 January 2023

Accepted: 26 January 2023

Published: 28 January 2023

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

1. Introduction

Electricity cannot be easily stored for future supply, unlike other commodities such as
oil. This means that electricity must be distributed to the consumers immediately after its
production. The distribution of electricity to ﬁnal users has been done with the help of the
traditional electrical grid (see deﬁnition in Table 1) which allows the delivery of electricity
from producers to consumers. To achieve that goal, it connects the electricity generating
stations and the transmission lines that deliver the electricity to the ﬁnal users. Traditional
electrical grids vary in size. When these grids started to expand, controlling them became a
very complex and difﬁcult task. Additionally, demand forecasting (see deﬁnition in Table 1)
has not traditionally been considered.

In this context, the concept of the smart grid (see deﬁnition in Table 1) arises and
starts to play an important role. This concept has been exhaustively reviewed in the
literature (e.g., [1–4]). Smart grids provide a two-way communication between consumers
and suppliers. Smart grids add hardware and software to the traditional electrical grid
to provide it with an autonomous response capacity to different events that can affect the
electrical grid. The ﬁnal objective is to achieve an optimal daily operational efﬁciency for the
electrical power delivery. In [4], the authors deﬁne “smart grid” as a new form of electricity
network that offers self-healing, power-ﬂow control, energy security and energy reliability
using digital technology. In [2], the authors highlight that the concept of the smart grid is
transforming the traditional electrical grid by using different types of advanced technology.
According to these authors, this concept integrates all the elements that are necessary to
generate, distribute, and consume energy efﬁciently and effectively. In [5], the authors
emphasize that the smart grid concept emerged to make the traditional electrical grid more

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23031467

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

sensorsSensors 2023, 23, 1467

2 of 30

efﬁcient, secure, reliable, and stable, and to be able to implement demand response (see
deﬁnition in Table 1).

Table 1. Important keywords for reading this article.

Keyword

Demand forecasting

Demand response

Load forecasting

Deﬁnition

The process of estimating end-user demand in relation to
electricity consumption over a given period.

A change in end-users’ electricity consumption to better balance
power demand and supply.
Also referred to as demand-side response.

The technique used by power companies to forecast the electricity
needed to meet demand to better balance power demand
and supply.

Load proﬁle

The electricity demand forecast made for the next 24 h.

Microgrid

Traditional electrical grid

Smart building

Smart environment

Smart grid

Smart home

An aggregation of loads and microsources operating as a single
system, i.e., a small electrical grid of users with local control and
supply capability. It is normally connected to a centralised
national electricity grid but can operate autonomously.

A grid developed speciﬁcally for the transmission of electrical
energy from points of production to the utilization points.
Also referred to as conventional/existing electrical/power grid.

A building that uses a wide range of technologies to enable
efﬁcient use of resources, including electrical energy, while
providing a comfortable environment for its occupants.

Any type of environment, such as a smart home or a smart
building, that uses a wide range of technologies to enable efﬁcient
use of resources, including electricity, while creating a
comfortable environment for its occupants.

An electrical grid that can monitor and provide real-time
information on its own activity with the help of digital
technologies. It is considered a developed form of the traditional
electrical grid.

A home that uses a wide range of technologies to enable efﬁcient
use of resources, including electricity, while creating a
comfortable environment for its occupants.

The smart grid paradigm allows consumers to ﬁnd out their energy usage patterns.
Consequently, consumers can control their consumption and use energy more efﬁciently.
In the implementation of the smart grid concept, demand response—for both household
and industrial purposes—plays an important role. Another useful tool is load forecasting
(see deﬁnition in Table 1). In [6] the authors mark the importance of this concept in the
context of smart grids, as forecasting the electricity needed to meet demand allows power
companies to better balance demand and supply. Power companies are especially interested
in achieving accurate forecasts for the next 24 h, which is called load proﬁle (see deﬁnition
in Table 1).

In addition, in recent years, the increased demand for electricity at certain times of
the day has created several problems. Load forecasting is especially important during
peak hours. Demand response encourages customers to ofﬂoad non-essential energy
consumption during these peak hours.

To face load forecasting challenges, it is necessary to use modern data-driven tech-
niques. Indeed, the incorporation of new technologies, such as Big Data, Machine Learning,
Deep Learning, and the Internet of Things (IoT), has upgraded the smart grid concept to
another level, as these technologies allow for improved demand forecasting and automated
demand response.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

3 of 30

This paper provides an insight into the importance of demand forecasting and im-
portant related factors in the context of smart grids, as well as the possibility of using
data-driven techniques for this purpose. More speciﬁcally, the authors focus on Deep
Learning techniques, as it has emerged as a good option for the implementation of demand
forecasting in the context of smart grids. The paper collects some experiences of using
different Deep Learning techniques in the energy domain for forecasting purposes. An efﬁ-
cient power system must take demand response into account. Additionally, accurate load
forecasting, especially in the short term, is essential, which is why industry stakeholders
and researchers are putting special efforts into it.

Table 1 deﬁnes some keywords related to the topic of this paper.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the reasons why
demand forecasting is important in the context of smart grids. Section 3 describes the most
important factors in relation to demand forecasting. Section 4 presents the different possible
classiﬁcations of demand forecasting techniques. Section 5 provides some fundamentals
and concepts useful to understand the Deep Learning models commonly used in the energy
domain. Section 6 collects different experiences of using these models in the context of
smart grids for forecasting purposes. Finally, Section 7 summarizes the main conclusions
of this work.

2. The Importance of Demand Forecasting

In [7] the authors summarize the main requirements of smart grids as follows: ﬂexible
enough to meet users’ needs, able to manage uncertain events, accessible for all users,
reliable enough to guarantee high-quality energy delivery to consumers, and innovative
enough to manage energy efﬁciently.

With these requirements in mind, smart grids should aim to develop low-cost, easy-
to-deploy technical solutions with distributed intelligence to operate efﬁciently in today’s
increasingly complex scenarios. To upgrade a traditional electrical grid into a smart grid,
intelligent and secure communication infrastructures are necessary [4].

According to the study presented in [8], forecasting can be applied in two main areas:
grid control and demand response. In [9], the authors highlight that forecasting models are
essential to provide optimal quality of the energy supply at the lowest cost. In addition,
real-time information on users’ energy consumption patterns will enable more sophisticated
and efﬁcient forecasting models to be applied. Forecasting must also consider the need
to manage constantly changing information. In [10], the authors highlight that, with the
smart grid, demand response programs can make the grid more cost efﬁcient and resilient.
The authors in [11] remark that there are important challenges in demand forecasting
due to the uncertainties in the generation proﬁle of distributed and renewable energy
generation resources. In fact, increasing attention is being paid to load forecasting models,
especially dealing with renewable energy sources (solar radiation, wind, etc.) [9].

The distributed generation paradigm facilitates the use of renewable energy sources
that can be placed near consumption points. When using this paradigm, smart grids have
multiple small plants that supply energy to their surroundings. Consequently, the depen-
dence on the distribution and transmission grid is smaller [9]. However, this paradigm
makes grid control even more uncertain, especially when the distributed generation sources
are renewable and consequently have a random nature. Despite this difﬁculty, the share
in energy production of variable renewable energy sources is expected to increase in the
coming years [12].

Another key element are microgrids (see deﬁnition in Table 1) [13,14]. Based on this
concept, and taking into consideration the intelligence deployed in buildings, new concepts
have emerged including smart homes (see deﬁnition in Table 1) and smart buildings (see
deﬁnition in Table 1). Buildings today are complex combinations of structures, systems,
and technology. Technology is a great ally in optimizing resources and improving safety.
Advances in building technologies are combining networked sensors and data recording
in innovative ways [15]. Modern facilities can adjust heating, cooling, and lighting to

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

4 of 30

maximize energy efﬁciency, providing also detailed reports of energy consumption. In
these new smart environments (see deﬁnition in Table 1), sensors and smart devices are
deployed to obtain enough information about the users’ energy consumption patterns.
Once again, this requires forecasting models that must be applied to the speciﬁc variables
of the scenario to be controlled.

Forecasting models will allow to consider variables (climatic, social, economic, habit-
related, etc.) that can inﬂuence the accuracy of forecasts [9]. These authors remark that
energy demand estimates in disaggregated scenarios, such as residential users in smart
buildings, are more complex compared to energy demand estimates for an aggregated
scenario, such as a country. Disaggregating the demand also facilitates the implementation
of demand response, as different prices can be offered based on the criteria set by the
power company.

The gradual integration of intelligence at the transmission, distribution and end-user
levels of the electricity system aims to optimize energy production and distribution to
adjust producers’ supply to consumers’ demand. Moreover, smart grids seek to improve
fault detection algorithms [16]. Accurate demand forecasts are very useful for energy
suppliers and other stakeholders in the energy market [17]. In fact, load forecasting has
been one of the main problems faced by the power industry since the introduction of
electric power [18].

3. Important Factors in Demand Forecasting

Electricity demand is affected by different variables or determinants. These variables
include forecasting horizons, the level of load aggregation, weather conditions (humidity,
temperature, wind speed, and cloudiness), socio-economic factors (industrial development,
population growth, cost of electricity, etc.), customer type (residential, commercial, and
industrial), and customer factors in relation to electricity consumption (characteristics of
the consumer’s electrical equipment) (e.g., [19–23]).

To fully understand demand forecasting techniques and objectives, it is necessary to ex-
amine these determinants. In this section, the authors will focus on (1) period, (2) economic
issues, (3) weather conditions, and (4) customer-related factors.

3.1. Period or Forecasting Horizon

The period commonly referred as forecasting horizon is probably one of the factors

that has the greatest impact.

According to different authors (e.g., [17,24]), demand forecasting can be classiﬁed into

three categories with respect to the forecasting horizon:
•
Short-term (typically one hour to one week).
• Medium-term (typically one week to one year).
•
Long-term (typically more than one year).

Factors affecting short-term demand forecasting usually do not last long, such as
sudden changes of weather [22]. The quality of short-term demand forecasting is critical for
electricity market players [20]. On the other hand, the inﬂuencing factors of medium-term
demand forecasting often have a certain time duration, such as seasonal weather changes.
Finally, the factors inﬂuencing long-term demand forecasting last for a long time, typically
several forecast periods, e.g., changes in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) [22]. Indeed,
economic factors have an important impact on long-term demand forecasting, but also on
medium and short-term forecasting [25].

The authors of [26] identify the following categories in relation to the forecasting

horizon:
•
•
• Medium-term and long-term (typically months to years).

Very short-term (typically seconds or minutes to several hours).
Short-term (typically hours to weeks).

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

5 of 30

According to these authors, very short-term demand forecasting models are generally
used to control the ﬂow. Short-term demand forecasting models are commonly used to
match supply and demand. And, ﬁnally, medium-term and long-term demand forecasting
models are typically used to plan asset utilities.

The authors in [27] showed that the load curve of grid stations is periodic, not only
in the daily load curve, but also in the weekly, monthly, seasonal, and annual load curves.
This periodicity makes it possible to forecast the load quite effectively.

Demand also reﬂects the daily lifestyle of the consumer [28]. Consumers’ daily demand
patterns are based on their daily activities, including work, leisure and sleep hours. In
addition, there are other demand variations patterns over time. For example, during
holidays and weekends, demand in industries and ofﬁces is signiﬁcantly lower than during
weekdays due to a drastic decrease in activity. Finally, power demand also varies cyclically
depending on the time of the year, day of the week, and time of day [22].

3.2. Socio-Economic Factors

Socio-economic factors, including industrial development, GDP, and the cost of elec-
tricity, also signiﬁcantly affect the evolution of demand. Indeed, as mentioned in the
previous section, economic factors considerably affect long-term demand forecasts, and
also have an important impact on medium- and short-term forecasts.

For example, industrial development will undoubtedly increase energy consumption.
The same will be true for population growth. This means that there is a positive correlation
between industrial development, or population growth, and energy consumption.

GDP is an indicator that captures a country’s economic output. Countries with a
higher GDP generate a greater quantity of goods and services and will consequently have
a higher standard of living and lifestyle habits, which will stimulate energy demand.

Another economic factor to consider is cost, as it also affects demand. For exam-
ple, when the price of electricity decreases, wasteful electricity consumption tends to
increase [22].

The cost of electricity depends on different factors and is shaped in different ways.
For example, in some countries such as Spain, there are two markets (regulated and free)
for electricity. In the free market, the cost of electricity is established in the contract signed
by the consumer. In contrast, in the regulated market, the price of electricity depends
on supply and demand. The price is updated hourly and ﬂuctuates. From the demand
side, the more electricity is demanded, the more expensive it is. When less electricity is
demanded, the cheaper it is. Normally, it is cheap to use electricity at dawn and expensive
to do it when everyone else is using it (e.g., at dinner time).

But it is not only the demand that inﬂuences prices, but also the supply of energy.
The reason is that variations in the price of electricity on the regulated market are caused
by differences between demand and supply. Consequently, supply must consider the
different ways of generating electricity, which have different costs. The cheapest is electricity
generated by renewable energies such as solar, wind and hydroelectric. The price of nuclear
energy is also low; however, in many countries (e.g., Spain), nuclear energy does not cover
all energy needs. Thermal (coal), cogeneration, or combined cycle—whose main fuel is
gas—tends to be more expensive. It is also important to remember that the main sources of
renewable energy, such as hydroelectric or wind, depend on uncontrollable external factors.
For example, sufﬁcient rainfall is essential to produce hydroelectric power. However, there
is no way to control the weather to make it favorable for producing electrical energy. Given
the above, the price is determined by the price of a mix of different sources of power
generation, from cheapest to most expensive, until the entire energy demand is met.

3.3. Weather Condition

There are different weather variables relevant for demand forecasting such as temper-

ature, humidity, and wind speed.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

6 of 30

The inﬂuence of weather conditions on demand forecasting has attracted the interest of
many researchers. As an example, the authors in [29] proposed different models to forecast
next day’s aggregated load using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs), considering the most
relevant weather variables—more speciﬁcally, mean temperature, relative humidity, and
aggregate solar radiation—to analyze the inﬂuence of weather.

Some authors have studied the relationship between temperature and electricity
consumption and claim that the correlation between temperature and the electricity load
curve is positive, especially in summer (e.g., [25]).

Currently, heat waves have become more common around the world, as well as the
possibility of extreme temperatures. In addition, heat waves are not only more frequent, but
also more intense and longer lasting. Moreover, the nights are getting warmer, which is an
added problem. The main effect of a heat wave is an increase in energy consumption as the
consumer turns on the air conditioning more and for longer periods of time. Additionally,
cooling systems must work harder as they must cope with higher temperatures.

During the summer, heat waves force the grid to be at maximum capacity. In fact, one
of the ways in which a heat wave affects consumption is through the increased saturation
of the electrical grid. While cold waves are counteracted with electricity, gas, wood, etc.,
heat waves can only be fought with electricity. In other words, the devices that consumers
use for cooling are mainly powered by electricity. For this reason, heat waves generate
more stress on power lines, as well as higher consumption.

It should be noted that, in colder countries, the increase in consumption during a heat
wave is usually lower. This is because the installation of air conditioning systems is not as
common as in warmer countries. However, these colder countries are facing heat waves
that did not occur in previous years (before climate change) and this is causing them all
type of problems, as they are less prepared. This situation is forcing these countries to make
changes such as increasing the use of cooling systems.

On the other side, experience of the harshness of temperature increases with humidity,
especially during the rainy season and summer. For this reason, electricity consumption
increases during humid summer days. It is also important to note that in coastal areas, such
as the Mediterranean area in Spain, electricity consumption tends to be higher. This is both
because houses tend to have more electrical equipment than in other areas, and because of
the high degree of humidity due to the proximity of the sea.

Wind speed also affects electricity consumption. When it is windy, the human body
feels that the temperature is much lower and more heating is needed, which increases
electricity consumption. However, it should also be noted that wind energy is one of the
main renewable energies. In other words, when there is wind, electricity consumption
increases, but at the same time its price decreases. This is because, as explained in the
previous section, the price of the electricity is usually determined as a mix of the different
energy sources, from cheapest energies (renewables, including wind, and nuclear) to the
most expensive generation sources (thermal, combined cycle).

Temperature, humidity, and wind affect the use of electricity. Humidity and tempera-
ture are also the main weather variables used in electricity demand prediction systems to
minimize operating costs. However, other factors, such as clouds, also play a role. For ex-
ample, during the day, when clouds disrupt sunlight there is usually a drop in temperature
and, consequently, higher electricity consumption.

3.4. Customer Factors

The type of customer (residential, commercial, and industrial), as well as other cus-
tomer factors related to electricity consumption (characteristics of the consumer’s electrical
equipment) can also affect demand. This is important because most energy companies
have different types of customers (residential, commercial, and industrial consumers),
who have equipment that varies in type and size. These different types of customers
have different load curves, although there are some similarities between commercial and
industrial customers.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

7 of 30

Table 2 summarizes the main determinants affecting electricity demand described in

this section.

Table 2. Main variables affecting electricity demand.

Determinant

Refers to . . .

Forecasting horizon

The time horizon for which demand forecasts are prepared.

Socio-economic factors

Industrial development, population growth, cost of electricity,
and any other socio-economic factors that may inﬂuence
end-users’ demand.

Weather conditions

Temperature, humidity, wind speed, and any other weather
conditions that may inﬂuence end-users’ demand.

Customer factors

Type of customer (residential, commercial, and industrial),
characteristics of the consumer’s equipment, and any other
customer factors that may affect the end-users’ demand.

4. Classiﬁcation of Demand Forecasting Techniques

This section classiﬁes demand forecasting models according to three different criteria:

(1) period, (2) forecasting objective, and (3) type of model used.

The ﬁrst classiﬁcation focuses on the point of view of the period to be forecasted,
i.e., the forecasting horizon. To select this criterion, the electricity demand determinants
presented in the previous section have been considered. The second classiﬁcation focuses on
the point of view of the forecasting objective, differentiating between forecasting techniques
that produce a single value and those that produce multiple values. Finally, the third
classiﬁcation focuses on the point of view of the model used.

4.1. Classiﬁcation of Demand Forecasting Techniques according to the Forecasting Horizon

As explained in the previous section, the main forecasting horizons that can be identi-

ﬁed are the following:
•
Very short-term: typically from seconds or minutes to several hours.
•
Short-Term: typically from hours to weeks.
• Medium-Term: typically from a week to a year.
•

Long-Term: typically more than a year.

The main difference is the scope of the variables used in each case. Very short-term
forecasting models use recent inputs (typically minutes or hours), short-term forecasting
models use inputs typically in the range of days, and medium and long-term forecasting
models use inputs typically in the range of weeks or even months.

Power companies are particularly interested in producing accurate forecasts for the
load proﬁle (e.g., [9,30,31]). This is because it can directly affect the optimal scheduling
of power generation units. However, due to the non-linear and stochastic behavior of
consumers, the load proﬁle is complex, and although research has been done in this area,
accurate forecasting models are still needed [32].

4.2. Classiﬁcation of Demand Forecasting Techniques by Forecasting Objective

Forecasting models can be also classiﬁed according to the number of values to be

forecasted. In this case, two main categories can be considered.

The ﬁrst category refers to forecasting techniques that produce only one value (e.g.,
next day’s total load, next day’s peak load, next hour’s load, etc.). Examples are found
in [33,34].

The second category refers to forecasting techniques that produce multiple values,
e.g., the next hours’ peak load plus another parameter (e.g., the aggregate load) or the load
proﬁle. Examples are found in [35–37].

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

8 of 30

Generally speaking, one-value forecasts are useful for optimizing the performance
of load ﬂows. On the other hand, multiple-value forecasts are mainly used for energy
generation scheduling [9].

4.3. Classiﬁcation of Demand Forecasting Techniques according to the Model Used

The model to be used is usually decided by the practitioner. In terms of models, the

main groups are linear and non-linear approaches.

Linear models include Spectral Decomposition (SD), Partial Least-Square (PLS), Auto-
Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), Auto-Regressive Conditional Heteroscedas-
ticity (ARCH), Auto-Regressive (AR), Auto-Regressive and Moving Average (ARMA),
Moving Average Model (MAM), Linear Regression (LR), and State-Space (SS).

Linear techniques have progressively lost importance and interest in favor of non-
linear techniques based on ANNs. Deep Learning models use ANNs, inspired by the
human nervous system. These models can learn patterns from the data generated and
forecast peak demand in the context of today’s complex smart scenarios, where a large
amount of data is continuously generated from different sources [7].

Table 3 summarizes the criteria commonly used to classify demand forecasting models.

Table 3. Main criteria commonly used to classify demand forecasting models.

Criteria

Refers to . . .

Forecasting horizon

Aim of prediction

The time horizon for which electricity demand forecasts are
prepared. The main forecasting horizons are:

-
-
-
-

very short-term: from seconds or minutes to several hours.
short-term: from hours to weeks.
medium-term: from a week to one year.
long-term: more than one year.

The number of values to be forecasted, mainly one value (e.g.,
next day’s total load, next day’s peak load, next hour’s load, etc.)
or multiple values (e.g., the load proﬁle).

Type of model used

Mainly linear (e.g., SD, PLS, ARIMA, ARCH, AR, ARMA, MAM,
LR, SS, etc.), and non-linear ANN-based models.

5. Fundamentals and Concepts of Machine Learning and Deep Learning Systems

Artiﬁcial Intelligence is a complex concept that, in a nutshell, refers to machine in-
telligence [38]. Unlike humans, Artiﬁcial Intelligence can identify patterns within a large
amount of data using a quite limited amount of time and resources. Furthermore, the
computational capacity of machines does not decrease with time and/or fatigue [39].

Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems use different type of learning methods, such as Machine

Learning and Deep Learning.

5.1. Machine Learning

Machine Learning algorithms are pre-trained to produce an outcome when confronted
with a never-before-seen dataset or situation [40]. However, the computer needs more
examples to learn than humans do [41]. Machine Learning allows the introduction of
intelligent decision-making in many areas and applications where developing algorithms
would be complex and excellent results are needed [42].

There are different categories of Machine Learning algorithms including supervised,
semisupervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning. These different categories of
algorithms are brieﬂy described below.

5.1.1. Supervised Learning

After being trained with a set of labelled data examples, these algorithms can predict
label values when the input has unlabeled data. The problems typically associated with
this type of learning are (1) regression and (2) classiﬁcation [43].

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

9 of 30

In regression the algorithm focuses on understanding the relationship between depen-
dent and independent variables. In classiﬁcation, the algorithm is used to predict the class
label of the data. Common classiﬁcation problems include (1) binary classiﬁcation, between
two class labels; (2) multi-class classiﬁcation, between more than two class labels; and (3)
multi-label classiﬁcation where one piece of data is associated with several classes or labels,
as opposed to traditional classiﬁcation problems with mutually exclusive class labels [44].
Methods used for supervised learning include Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA),
Naive Bayes (NB), K-nearest Neighbors (KNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision
Tree (DT), Random Forest (RF), Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost), Extreme Gradient Boosting
(XGBoost), Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), Rule-based Classiﬁcation (for classiﬁcation);
and LR, Non-Linear Regression (NLR), and Ordinary Least Squares Regression (OLS) (for
regression) [44,45]. The most widely cited and implemented supervised learners in the
literature are DT, NB, and SVM algorithms [46].

Some interesting practical applications are text classiﬁcation, predicting the sentiment
of a text (such as a Tweet or other social media), assessing the environmental sustainability
of clothing products [47], characterizing, predicting, and treating mental disorders [48],
and estimating peak energy demand.

5.1.2. Unsupervised Learning

This type of learning uses unlabeled data.

In this case, the system explores the
unlabeled data to ﬁnd hidden structures, rather than predicting the correct output. This
type of learning is not directly applicable to regression or classiﬁcation problems, as the
possible values of the output are unknown [49]. Instead, it is often used for (1) clustering,
(2) association, and (3) dimensionality reduction [43].

Clustering allows unlabeled data to be grouped based on their similarities or differ-
ences [49,50]. Association uses different rules to identify new and relevant insights between
the objects of a set. Finally, dimension reduction allows a reduction of the number of
features (or dimensions) of a dataset to eliminate irrelevant or less important features and
thus reduce the complexity of the model [44]. This reduction in the number of features
can be done by keeping a subset of the original features (feature selection) or by creating
completely new features (feature extraction).

The most popular clustering algorithm is probably K-means clustering, where the k
value represents the size of the cluster [44,45,51]. Association algorithms include Apriori,
Equivalence Class Transformation (ECLAT), and Frequent Pattern (F-P) Growth algorithms.
Finally, dimensionality reduction typically uses the Chi-squared test, Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) test, Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient, Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) for
feature selection, and Principal Components Analysis (PCA) for feature extraction.

According to [46], the most commonly used unsupervised learners are K-means,

hierarchical clustering, and PCA.

These unsupervised learners can have many practical applications, such as facial
recognition, customer classiﬁcation, patient classiﬁcation, detecting cyber-attacks or intru-
sions [52], and data analysis in the astronomical ﬁeld [53].

5.1.3. Semisupervised Learning

Conceptually situated between supervised and unsupervised learning, this type of
learning allows the taking advantage of the large unlabeled datasets that are available in
some cases combined with (usually smaller) amounts of labelled data [54,55]. This opens
up interesting possibilities as labelled data are often scarce, while unlabeled data are more
frequent, and a semisupervised learner can obtain better predictions than those produced
using only labelled data [44].

Candidate applications are those where there is only a small set of labelled examples,
and many more unlabeled ones, or when the labelling effort is too high. An example is
medical imaging, where a small amount of training data can provide a large improvement
in accuracy [43,56].

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

10 of 30

Table 4 compares Supervised and Unsupervised learning, focusing on the type of
input data used in each case (labeled versus unlabeled data), and the main tasks for which
both types of learning are used (classiﬁcation, regression versus clustering, association, and
dimensionality reduction).

Table 4. Supervised vs unsupervised learning.

Supervised Learning

Unsupervised Learning

It refers to:

Developing predictive models based on input
and output data

Grouping and interpreting data based on
input data

Uses as input:

Labelled data

Unlabelled data

Typically used for:

Classiﬁcation
Regression

Clustering
Association
Dimensionality reduction

5.1.4. Reinforcement Learning

This learning technique depends on the relationship between an agent performing an
activity and its environment, which provides positive or negative feedback [57,58]. The
agent must choose actions that maximize the reward in that environment. Popular methods
include Monte Carlo, Q-learning, and Deep Q-learning [44].

Traditionally common applications include strategy games such as chess, autonomous
driving, supply chain logistics and manufacturing, genetic algorithms [57], 5G mobility
management [59], and personalized care delivery [60].

5.2. Deep Learning

Machine Learning can be classiﬁed into shallow and deep, considering the complexity
and structure of the algorithm [41]. Deep Learning uses multiple layers of neurons com-
posed of complex structures to model high-level data abstractions [61]. The type of output
and the characteristics of the data determine the algorithm to be used for a particular use
case [62].

Deep Learning uses ANNs inspired by the human nervous system [63]. This type of
network typically has two layers of input and output nodes respectively, connected to each
other by one or more layers of hidden nodes. Possible deep ANN architectures include
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Network (LSTM-
RNN), Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN
or ConvNet).

According to our literature review, the most widely used models in the energy domain
are Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) and Conditional Restricted Boltz-
mann Machine (CRBM) and a variation of any of them, a combination of two or more of
them, or the combination of any of them with other techniques. These models are brieﬂy
described below.

5.2.1. Convolutional Neural Networks

These networks are biologically inspired networks, like the ordinary neural networks.
However, in this type of network the inputs are assumed to have a speciﬁc structure such
as images [64]. Being one of the most widely used and effective models for Deep Learning,
these networks usually include two types of layers (i.e., pooling and convolution layers). A
typical CNN architecture usually consists of an input layer, a convolutional layer, a Max
pooling layer, and the ﬁnal fully connected layer, as shown in Figure 1 [65].

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

11 of 30

Figure 1. Standard Convolutional Neural Network Architecture [65].

The total input to the jth feature map of layer l at position (x,y) can be expressed [66]:

v

(l)
j (x, y) =

l
∑
i=1

F−1
∑
u,v=0

k

(l)
ji (u, v)·O

(l−1)
i

(x − u, y − v) + b

(l)
j

Convolutional layer output:

O

(l−1)
i

(x, y) = f

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

v

(l)
j (x, y)

Pooling layer output:

O

(l+1)
i

(x, y) = max

u,v=0,...,G−1

O

(l)
i (x·s + u , y·s + v)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(l−1)
i

where O

trainable convolution kernel; b

(i = 1, . . . , l) represents feature maps on the (l + 1) layer; k

(l)
ji (u, v) denotes
indicates trainable bias; G is pooling size; and S means stride.
Different architectural designs explore the effect of multilevel transformations on the
learning ability of such networks. One of these possible architectural designs is Pyramid.
The Pyramid Architecture of Convolutional Neural Network is commonly known as
Pyramid-CNN [66].

(l)
j

5.2.2. Recurrent Neural Networks

In this type of network, the connections between nodes form a directed or undirected

graph along a time sequence. Figure 2 shows a typical RNN structure [65].

Figure 2. Framework of a Recurrent Neural Network: Input layer (Xt); output layer (Ot); hidden
layer (St); parameter matrices and vectors (U, V, W); activation function of output layer (σy); and
activation function of hidden layer (σh) [65].

Sensors 2022, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 37   According to our literature review, the most widely used models in the energy do-main are Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) and Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machine (CRBM) and a variation of any of them, a combination of two or more of them, or the combination of any of them with other techniques. These models are briefly described below. 5.2.1. Convolutional Neural Networks These networks are biologically inspired networks, like the ordinary neural net-works. However, in this type of network the inputs are assumed to have a specific struc-ture such as images [64]. Being one of the most widely used and effective models for Deep Learning, these networks usually include two types of layers (i.e., pooling and convolu-tion layers). A typical CNN architecture usually consists of an input layer, a convolutional layer, a Max pooling layer, and the final fully connected layer, as shown in Figure 1 [65].  Figure 1. Standard Convolutional Neural Network Architecture [65]. The total input to the jth feature map of layer l at position (x,y) can be expressed [66]: 𝑣(cid:3037)((cid:3039))(𝑥,𝑦)=(cid:3533)(cid:3533)𝑘(cid:3037)(cid:3036)((cid:3039))(cid:3007)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)(cid:3048),(cid:3049)(cid:2880)(cid:2868)(cid:3039)(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)(𝑢,𝑣)∙𝑂(cid:3036)((cid:3039)(cid:2879)(cid:2869))(𝑥−𝑢,𝑦−𝑣)+𝑏(cid:3037)((cid:3039)) (1)Convolutional layer output: 𝑂(cid:3036)((cid:3039)(cid:2879)(cid:2869))(𝑥,𝑦)=𝑓(cid:3435)𝑣(cid:3037)((cid:3039))(𝑥,𝑦)(cid:3439) (2)Pooling layer output: 𝑂(cid:3036)((cid:3039)(cid:2878)(cid:2869))(𝑥,𝑦)=max(cid:3048),(cid:3049)(cid:2880)(cid:2868),…,(cid:3008)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)𝑂(cid:3036)((cid:3039))(𝑥∙𝑠+𝑢 ,𝑦∙𝑠+𝑣) (3)where 𝑂(cid:3036)((cid:3039)(cid:2879)(cid:2869))(𝑖=1,…,𝑙) represents feature maps on the (l+1) layer; 𝑘(cid:3037)(cid:3036)((cid:3039))(𝑢,𝑣) denotes trainable convolution kernel; 𝑏(cid:3037)((cid:3039)) indicates trainable bias; G is pooling size; and S means stride. Different architectural designs explore the effect of multilevel transformations on the learning ability of such networks. One of these possible architectural designs is Pyramid. The Pyramid Architecture of Convolutional Neural Network is commonly known as Pyr-amid-CNN [66]. 5.2.2. Recurrent Neural Networks In this type of network, the connections between nodes form a directed or undirected graph along a time sequence. Figure 2 shows a typical RNN structure [65]. Sensors 2022, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 37    Figure 2. Framework of a Recurrent Neural Network: Input layer (Xt); output layer (Ot); hidden layer (St); parameter matrices and vectors (U, V, W); activation function of output layer (σy); and activation function of hidden layer (σh) [65]. This network can use a gating mechanism called Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) and introduced in 2014 by the authors in [67]. GRU are like LSTM networks but with a forget-ting gate and fewer parameters as they lack an output gate. Another variation of this type of network, proposed by Elman [68], is the Elman RNN that includes modifiable feedforward connections and fixed recurrent connections. It uses a set of context nodes to store internal states, which gives it certain unique dynamic char-acteristics over static ones [69]. 5.2.3. Long Short-Term Memory These networks are a special kind of RNN. Unlike standard feedforward neural net-works, these networks have feedback connections, and can even process entire sequences of data (such as speech or video), in addition to individual data points (such as images). This type of RNN contains an input layer, a recurrent hidden layer, and an output layer, with a memory block structure as shown in Figure 3 [70].  Figure 3. LSTM memory block [70]. The LSTM memory block can be described according to the following equations [70]: 𝑖(cid:3047)=𝜎(𝑊(cid:3036)𝑥(cid:3047)+𝑈(cid:3036)ℎ(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)+𝑏(cid:3036)) (4)Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

12 of 30

This network can use a gating mechanism called Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) and
introduced in 2014 by the authors in [67]. GRU are like LSTM networks but with a forgetting
gate and fewer parameters as they lack an output gate.

Another variation of this type of network, proposed by Elman [68], is the Elman
RNN that includes modiﬁable feedforward connections and ﬁxed recurrent connections. It
uses a set of context nodes to store internal states, which gives it certain unique dynamic
characteristics over static ones [69].

5.2.3. Long Short-Term Memory

These networks are a special kind of RNN. Unlike standard feedforward neural
networks, these networks have feedback connections, and can even process entire sequences
of data (such as speech or video), in addition to individual data points (such as images).

This type of RNN contains an input layer, a recurrent hidden layer, and an output

layer, with a memory block structure as shown in Figure 3 [70].

Figure 3. LSTM memory block [70].

The LSTM memory block can be described according to the following equations [70]:

it = σ(Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)

(cid:16)

ft = σ

Wf xt + U f ht−1 + b f

(cid:17)

ct = ft (cid:12) ct−1 + it (cid:12) g(Wcxt + Ucht−1 + bc)

Ot = σ(WOxt + UOht−1 + VOct + bO)

ht = Ot (cid:12) h(ct)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

where xt is the model input at time t; Wi, Wf, Wc, W0, Ui, Uf, Uc, U0, V0 are weight matrices;
bi, bf, bc, b0 are bias vectors; it, ft, 0t are respectively the activations of the three gates at time
t; ct is the state of memory cell at time t; ht is the output of the memory block at time t; (cid:12)
represents the scalar product of two vectors; σ(x) is the gate activation function; g(x) is the
cell input activation function; h(x) is the cell output activation function.

A possible extension of this model is the Bidirectional LSTM (B-LSTM). The aim of this
type of LSTM network is to analyze sequences from both front-to-back and back-to-front,
i.e., the sequence information ﬂows in both directions backwards and forwards, unlike in a
normal LSTM.

Sensors 2022, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 37    Figure 2. Framework of a Recurrent Neural Network: Input layer (Xt); output layer (Ot); hidden layer (St); parameter matrices and vectors (U, V, W); activation function of output layer (σy); and activation function of hidden layer (σh) [65]. This network can use a gating mechanism called Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) and introduced in 2014 by the authors in [67]. GRU are like LSTM networks but with a forget-ting gate and fewer parameters as they lack an output gate. Another variation of this type of network, proposed by Elman [68], is the Elman RNN that includes modifiable feedforward connections and fixed recurrent connections. It uses a set of context nodes to store internal states, which gives it certain unique dynamic char-acteristics over static ones [69]. 5.2.3. Long Short-Term Memory These networks are a special kind of RNN. Unlike standard feedforward neural net-works, these networks have feedback connections, and can even process entire sequences of data (such as speech or video), in addition to individual data points (such as images). This type of RNN contains an input layer, a recurrent hidden layer, and an output layer, with a memory block structure as shown in Figure 3 [70].  Figure 3. LSTM memory block [70]. The LSTM memory block can be described according to the following equations [70]: 𝑖(cid:3047)=𝜎(𝑊(cid:3036)𝑥(cid:3047)+𝑈(cid:3036)ℎ(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)+𝑏(cid:3036)) (4)Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

13 of 30

5.2.4. Deep Q Network and Dueling Deep-Q Network

Deep Q Network (DQN) and Dueling Deep-Q Network (DDQN) are a type of ANN
using the Deep Q learning algorithm, which is popular in reinforcement learning. In a
dueling network there are two streams to separately estimate the state-value as well as
the advantages for each action. The main objective of Deep-Q Network is to choose the
best action in a certain state. Considering π is the policy followed by an agent in a given
environment, the function Qπ can be deﬁned as follows [71]:

Qπ(s, a) = E[r1 + γr2 + . . .|S0 = s, A0 = a, π]#

(9)

where s is a state; a is an action; ri is the potential reward; γ ∈ [0, 1] is a discount factor
for making the immediate reward more important than the futures ones. Therefore, the
objective of Q-learning is to maximize the optimized value function Q*(s,a) = max πQ π(s,a).
Figure 4 shows the scheme of a typical DQN architecture [71].

Figure 4. Deep Q-Network architecture [71].

5.2.5. Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machine

A Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) is a stochastic RNN with two layers, one with
visible units and one with binary hidden units. This type of network can learn a probability
distribution over its set of inputs. RBMs are a variant of Boltzmann Machines (BM) and
can be in supervised or unsupervised mode, depending on the task to be performed.

When BMs are restricted, a pair of nodes from each of the two groups of units (visible
and hidden) can have a symmetric connection between them, but there are no connections
between nodes in the same group, allowing for more efﬁcient training. On the other hand,
unrestricted BMs can have connections between hidden units.

RBM consists of m visible units V = (v1, . . . , vm) representing observable data and n
hidden units H = (h1, . . . , hn) capturing dependencies between observable variables, with
the conditional layer units F = (f 1, . . . , fp), as it is shown in Figure 5 [72].

The energy function of CRBM is [73]:

E(V, H, F) = − ∑ m

i=1 ∑ K

k=1vk

i bk

i − ∑ m

i=1 ∑ H

j=1 ∑ k

k=1vk

i Wk

ijhj − ∑ H

j=1hjbj − ∑ H

j=1 ∑ F

q=1 fqDqj

(10)

where m represents the number of items the user rated; H is the number of hidden layers;
F is the number of conditional layers; K is the highly rating; vk
i is the binary value of
visible layer unit i and rating k; hj is the binary value of hidden unit j; fq is the binary value
of conditional layer F; bk
i is the bias of rating k with visible layer unit i; bj is the bias of
feature j; Wk
ij is the connected weight between hidden layer H and visible layer V; D is the
connected weight between hidden layer H and conditional layer F; Dqj is the connected
weight between hidden feature j and conditional layer unit q.

Sensors 2022, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 37   𝑓(cid:3047)=𝜎(𝑊(cid:3033)𝑥(cid:3047)+𝑈(cid:3033)ℎ(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)+𝑏(cid:3033)) (5)𝑐(cid:3047)=𝑓(cid:3047)⊙𝑐(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)+𝑖(cid:3047)⊙𝑔(𝑊(cid:3030)𝑥(cid:3047)+𝑈(cid:3030)ℎ(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)+𝑏(cid:3030)) (6)𝑂(cid:3047)=𝜎(𝑊(cid:3016)𝑥(cid:3047)+𝑈(cid:3016)ℎ(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)+𝑉(cid:3016)𝑐(cid:3047)+𝑏(cid:3016)) (7)ℎ(cid:3047)=𝑂(cid:3047)⊙ℎ(𝑐(cid:3047)) (8)where xt is the model input at time t; Wi, Wf, Wc, W0, Ui, Uf, Uc, U0, V0 are weight matrices; bi, bf, bc, b0 are bias vectors; it, ft, 0t are respectively the activations of the three gates at time t; ct is the state of memory cell at time t; ht is the output of the memory block at time t; ⊙ represents the scalar product of two vectors; 𝜎(𝑥) is the gate activation function; g(x) is the cell input activation function; h(x) is the cell output activation function. A possible extension of this model is the Bidirectional LSTM (B-LSTM). The aim of this type of LSTM network is to analyze sequences from both front-to-back and back-to-front, i.e., the sequence information flows in both directions backwards and forwards, un-like in a normal LSTM. 5.2.4. Deep Q Network and Dueling Deep-Q Network Deep Q Network (DQN) and Dueling Deep-Q Network (DDQN) are a type of ANN using the Deep Q learning algorithm, which is popular in reinforcement learning. In a dueling network there are two streams to separately estimate the state-value as well as the advantages for each action. The main objective of Deep-Q Network is to choose the best action in a certain state. Considering π is the policy followed by an agent in a given environment, the function Qπ can be defined as follows [71]: 𝑄(cid:3095)(𝑠,𝑎)=𝐸(cid:4670)𝑟(cid:2869)+𝛾𝑟(cid:2870)+⋯|𝑆(cid:2868)=𝑠,𝐴(cid:2868)=𝑎,𝜋(cid:4671)# (9)where s is a state; a is an action; ri is the potential reward; 𝛾∈(cid:4670)0,1(cid:4671) is a discount factor for making the immediate reward more important than the futures ones. Therefore, the ob-jective of Q-learning is to maximize the optimized value function Q*(s,a)=max πQ π(s,a). Figure 4 shows the scheme of a typical DQN architecture [71].  Figure 4. Deep Q-Network architecture [71]. 5.2.5. Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machine A Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) is a stochastic RNN with two layers, one with visible units and one with binary hidden units. This type of network can learn a probability distribution over its set of inputs. RBMs are a variant of Boltzmann Machines Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

14 of 30

Figure 5. Restricted Boltzmann machine [73].

In [73], the authors introduced the Factored Conditioned Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines (FCRBMs) by adding the concept of factored, multiplicative, and tridirectional
interactions to predict multiple human movement styles.

Finally, Deep Belief Networks (DBNs) are formed by several RBMs stacked on top of

the other [74].

6. Deep Learning Models and Demand Forecasting in the Context of Smart Grids

Researchers have proposed forecasting models in the two main areas where Deep
Learning techniques can be applied [8]: (1) demand management (e.g., [75,76]) and (2) grid
control (e.g., [77–79]).

Due to the growing demand for energy from different sectors, supply and demand
must be balanced in the electrical grid. In this scenario, smart grids can play an important
role by providing a bidirectional ﬂow of energy between consumers and utilities. Unlike
traditional electrical grids, smart grids have sophisticated sensing devices that generate
data from which energy patterns can be derived. These patterns are extremely useful for
load forecasting, peak shaving, and demand response management.

As the amount of data generated by a smart grid is huge and constantly increasing,
Deep Learning based models are a good option to understand consumption patterns and
make forecasts. Researchers have studied the possibilities of using Deep Learning models,
with LSTM networks playing a leading role (e.g., [32,57,80]).

Table 5 summarizes different works where practitioners have successfully used Deep
Learning techniques for forecasting purposes. These experiences have been identiﬁed
after a systematic review of the published literature. The search for references has been
carried out in different scientiﬁc databases (e.g., ScienceDirect, SpringeLink, IEEExplore,
etc.). Papers from various relevant scientiﬁc journals such as Energy Informatics, IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, Energies and Applied Energy have also been reviewed. The
keywords used include:

-

-

terms like Deep Learning, ANN, neural networks, and the names of different Deep
Learning models, both full and acronyms (e.g., Long Short-Term Memory networks
and LSTM),

combined (AND) with:

terms related to the energy ﬁeld, more speciﬁcally, “energy demand forecasting”,
“electricity demand forecasting”, “load forecasting”, “demand response”, “demand-
side response” and variations of these expressions.

Sensors 2022, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 37   (BM) and can be in supervised or unsupervised mode, depending on the task to be per-formed. When BMs are restricted, a pair of nodes from each of the two groups of units (visible and hidden) can have a symmetric connection between them, but there are no connections between nodes in the same group, allowing for more efficient training. On the other hand, unrestricted BMs can have connections between hidden units. RBM consists of m visible units V=(v1,…, vm) representing observable data and n hid-den units H=(h1,…, hn) capturing dependencies between observable variables, with the conditional layer units F=(f1,…, fp), as it is shown in Figure 5 [72].  Figure 5. Restricted Boltzmann machine [73]. The energy function of CRBM is [73]:𝐸(𝑉,𝐻,𝐹)=−∑∑𝑣(cid:3036)(cid:3038)𝑏(cid:3036)(cid:3038)−(cid:3012)(cid:3038)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)(cid:3040)(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)∑∑∑𝑣(cid:3036)(cid:3038)𝑊(cid:3036)(cid:3037)(cid:3038)ℎ(cid:3037)−∑ℎ(cid:3037)𝑏(cid:3037)−∑∑𝑓(cid:3044)𝐷(cid:3044)(cid:3285)(cid:3007)(cid:3044)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)(cid:3009)(cid:3037)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)(cid:3009)(cid:3037)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)(cid:3038)(cid:3038)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)(cid:3009)(cid:3037)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)(cid:3040)(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869) (10)where m represents the number of items the user rated; H is the number of hidden layers; F is the number of conditional layers; K is the highly rating; 𝑣(cid:3036)(cid:3038) is the binary value of visible layer unit i and rating k; hj is the binary value of hidden unit j; fq is the binary value of conditional layer F; 𝑏(cid:3036)(cid:3038) is the bias of rating k with visible layer unit i; bj is the bias of feature j; 𝑊(cid:3036)(cid:3037)(cid:3038) is the connected weight between hidden layer H and visible layer V; D is the connected weight between hidden layer H and conditional layer F; Dqj is the connected weight between hidden feature j and conditional layer unit q. In [73], the authors introduced the Factored Conditioned Restricted Boltzmann Ma-chines (FCRBMs) by adding the concept of factored, multiplicative, and tridirectional in-teractions to predict multiple human movement styles. Finally, Deep Belief Networks (DBNs) are formed by several RBMs stacked on top of the other [74]. 6. Deep Learning Models and Demand Forecasting in the Context of Smart Grids Researchers have proposed forecasting models in the two main areas where Deep Learning techniques can be applied [8]: (1) demand management (e.g., [75,76]) and (2) grid control (e.g., [77–79]). Due to the growing demand for energy from different sectors, supply and demand must be balanced in the electrical grid. In this scenario, smart grids can play an important role by providing a bidirectional flow of energy between consumers and utilities. Unlike traditional electrical grids, smart grids have sophisticated sensing devices that generate data from which energy patterns can be derived. These patterns are extremely useful for load forecasting, peak shaving, and demand response management. Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

Reference

Rodríguez et al.
[81]

Year

2022

Taleb et al.
[82]

Xu et al.
[83]

Yem Souhe et al.
[84]

Aurangzeb et al.
[85]

Jahangir et al.
[86]

Mubashar et al.
[87]

Table 5. Examples of application of Deep Learning techniques in the energy domain, focusing on demand/load forecasting.

Models

Forecasting Horizon

Dataset

Outcome

15 of 30

Feedforward Spatiotemporal
Neural Network + t-Student
PDF (Probability Distribution
Function)

2022

CNN + LSTM + MLP

2022

2022

RBM

Support Vector Regression
(SVR) + Fireﬂy Algorithm
(FA) + Adaptive
Neuro-Fuzzy Inference
System (ANFIS)

Minutes

Half-hourly
1-day
1-week

1-day
1-year

Years

2021

Pyramid-CNN

Half-hourly

Solar irradiation database of the meteorological stations of
Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, provided by the Meteorological Agency of
the Basque Government: Euskalmet
(http://www.euskalmet.euskadi.eus/) (accessed on 26 November
2022).

Solar irradiation forecaster satisfying the required
condition Prediction Interval Coverage Percentage
(PICP)0.05 > 0.95 on 85.22% of the days in 2017.

Data from EDM (Électricité de Mayotte) Open Data
(https://opendata.electricitedemayotte.com/) (accessed on 26
November 2022).

Demand forecasting with Mean Absolute Percentage
Error (MAPE) of 1.71% for 30-min predictions, 3.5%
for 1-day predictions, and 5.1% for 1-week predictions.

Historical load data on similar days from past years. Data from
March 2010 to March 2018 were used for training and from March
2019 to March 2020 for validation.

Demand forecasting with mean of MAPE of less than
5% for all days in 1-day forecasts and MAPE less than
5% for 1-year forecasts.

Smart meter consumption data over a 24-year period (1994 to 2017)
in Cameroon, obtained from the Electricity Distribution Agency,
the Electricity Sector Regulatory Agency of Cameroon, and the
World Bank.

Demand forecasting with Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE) of 0.1524, Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of
21.023, and MAPE of 0.4124% showed that the
proposed method outperformed other models such as
LSTM and RF.

Data from individual customers who have a hot water system
installed, from the Australian Government’s Smart Grid Smart
City (SGSC) project database, launched in 2010, which contains
data on thousands of individual household energy customers.

Demand forecasting for randomly selected customers
from low and high consumption customer groups
with an improvement of MAPE up to 10% compared
to LSTM.

2021

B-LSTM

Hourly

Dataset for the province of Ontario (Canada). Hourly electricity
price, load demand, and wind speed data for 3 years (from 1
January 2016, to 30 December 2018, with 1-h time intervals).

2021

LSTM

1-month

Data from 12 houses over a period of 3 consecutive months.

Improved forecasting results for wind speed, load,
and electricity price, especially at peak points, based
on RMSE, MAE, and MAPE, compared to other
models such as LSTM and CNN.

Comparison of LSTM residential load demand
forecasting with ARIMA and Exponential Smoothing,
for individual and aggregate residential load demand,
using MAE.

Experimental results for output power forecasting,
based on RMSE, showed that the proposed 2D-CNN
model outperformed a multivariate implementation
of LSTM.

Rosato et al.
[88]

2021

CNN + LSTM

1-day
3-days
7-days

Data from the NWTC photovoltaic power production plant,
geographically identiﬁed by coordinates: 3954038.200 N,
10514004.900 W, elevation 1855 m, located in Denver, Colorado,
United States. Irradiance data, along with other meteorological
factors, were retrieved through the Measurement and
Instrumentation Data Centre (MIDC) database. All time series
were collected in the same plant, sampled hourly (i.e., 24 samples a
day) and referred to the years 2017 and 2018.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

16 of 30

Reference

Zhang et al.
[89]

Year

2021

Table 5. Cont.

Models

DQN

Forecasting Horizon

Dataset

Outcome

3-h

Smart thermostats’ data collected during 1 month from a
real building.

Automated building demand response control
framework that enables cost-effective large-scale
deployments. Cost analysis of a commercial building
showed that the annual cost of optimal policy training
was only 2.25% of the demand response incentive
received.

Accurate short-term demand forecasting of individual
household customers with irregular energy
consumption patterns. The results indicated that
demand forecasting of individual households is
highly unpredictable: more than 57% of the customers
had more than 20 outliers in the daily energy
consumption, yet the model fairly reasonably tracked
the unpredictable energy consumption.

Development of a smart building case study powered
by the Internet of Things.

Aurangzeb &
Alhussein
[90]

2020

Pyramid-CNN

Short-term (several time
horizons)

Australian Government SGSC project database, initiated in 2010,
containing data from thousands of individual household
energy customers.

Bedi et al. [75]

2020

Elman RNN

1-day

Clemson University’s
Real-Time Power and Intelligent Systems (RTPIS) Laboratory,
South Carolina, United States.

Escobar et al.
[91]

2020

LSTM, CNN, GRU, and
hybrid models: CNN-LSTM
and CNN-GRU

Hafeez et al. [32]

2020

Hafeez et al.
[92]

Hong et al.
[21]

Nguyen et al.
[93]

2020

2020

2020

FCRBM

FCRBM

Iterative Resblocks Based
Deep Neural Network
(IRBDNN)

LSTM

3-days

Hourly

1-month

1-week

1-day

4 years of hourly data from Madrid, including energy
consumption, energy generation, pricing data, and meteorological
information: temperature (K), humidity (water percentage in the
air), wind direction in sexagesimal degrees, wind speed in miles
per second (m/s), onshore wind and solar energy, and total load,
these last in MW.

Comparative analysis of energy demand, and solar
and onshore wind generation forecasting, for LSTM,
CNN, GRU, and hybrid models merging CNN with
LSTM and GRU, based on MAE, MAPE and RMSE.
The combination of the best CNN and GRU models
obtained better prediction results.

PJM electricity market. FE, Dayton, and EKPC power grids,
United States.

Model compared to other forecasting methods such as
LSTM.

PJM electricity market, years 2014–2017, FE power grid,
United States.

Hybrid electricity consumption forecasting model to
provide efﬁcient and accurate forecasting with an
affordable convergence rate.

REDD (Reference Energy Disaggregation Dataset), a publicly
available dataset that records household appliance consumption
data for residential users from March 2011 to July 2011.

IRBDNN model compared to existing methods such
as DNN, ARMA and ELM, based on MAPE, RMSE
and MAE, for residential buildings.

Electricity load consumption from 2012 to 2017 including about
2200 values in kWh, from Tien Giang, Vietnam.

Demand forecasting results evaluated using RMSE.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

17 of 30

Table 5. Cont.

Models

Forecasting Horizon

Dataset

Outcome

Reference

Rosato et al.
[94]

Year

2020

CNN + LSTM

3-days

Qi et al.
[95]

Wang et al.
[96]

Wen et al.
[80]

Wen et al.
[97]

Yang et al.
[98]

2020

CNN + LSTM

1-day

2020

2020

2020

2020

Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) + DDQN

Deep Recurrent Neural
Network (DRNN) + GRU +
LSTM

Modiﬁed RNN

Multitask Bayesian Neural
Network (MT-BNN)

Hourly

Hourly

Hourly

Hourly

Amin et al.
[99]

2019

LSTM

Several time horizons

Photovoltaic power production plant at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory located in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, United States, with
geographic coordinates: 3592099:600 N, 8430095:200 W, elevation
245 m. Irradiance data were retrieved through the MIDC database

Data from the integrated energy system of an industrial area in
China, which is a combined electric, cooling, and heating system.

Data from IEEE 33-node extension system (selected as a typical
model of medium voltage distribution system model).

Experimental results of load forecasting, based on
RMSE, showed that the combination of CNN and
LSTM outperformed the isolated use of LSTM.

Experimental results showed that the CNN-LSTM
composite forecasting model for short-term demand
of individual household customers has a higher
prediction accuracy than the CNN and LSTM models.

DDQN improves the noise and instability in
traditional DQN, and reduces operation costs and
peak load demand while regulating voltage to the safe
limit.

Dataport, Pecan Street Inc. Residential buildings, Austin, Texas,
United States.

Deep learning model to forecast and ﬁll in missing
data on residential buildings energy demand.

Dataport, Pecan Street Inc. Residential buildings, Europe.

Two public datasets on smart meters provided by the Irish
Commission for Energy Regulation (CER) and the Australian
Government’s SGSC project, respectively. The CER dataset was
collected between July 2009 and December 2010 with the
participation of more than 4225 residential customers and 2210
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) participating. The SGSC
dataset was collected for about 10,000 customers between 2010 and
2014 in New South Wales. Electricity consumption (kWh) was
recorded every half hour at each meter in both datasets.

Smart meter data collected over 2 years from 114 apartments,
along with weather information for the same period.

Experimental results on residential buildings demand
showed that peak demand can be reduced by 17%.

Experimental results, based on MAE and RMSE,
showed that the proposed load forecasting framework
for residential demand response provided higher
accuracy of individual electricity consumption than
other methods such as SVR, Gradient Boosted
Regression Trees (GBRT), RF, and Pooling-based Long
Short-Term Memory (PLSTM).

Comparison of three demand forecasting methods: a
piecewise LR model, the univariate seasonal ARIMA
model, and a multivariate LSTM model. The results
showed that while the LR model could be used for
long-term planning, the LSTM model signiﬁcantly
improved the accuracy of short-term (1-day) demand
forecasting compared to the ARIMA and LR models.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

18 of 30

Reference

Atef & Eltawil
[100]

Year

2019

Table 5. Cont.

Models

LSTM

Forecasting Horizon

Hourly

Chan et al. [101]

2019

CNN

Short-term

Dataset

Outcome

Real time electricity prices from Denmark from 17 January 2013 to
30 September 2018.

Comparative study of LSTM and SVR for electricity
price forecasting in smart grids. Results showed that
both models are effective. However, LSTM
outperformed SVR, with a mean RMSE value of 1.1165
and 0.416 respectively.

Multivariate series composed of 9 variables and 2,075,259
observations provided by the Data Science and Interaction
Scientiﬁc Team, Region de Paris, France. Data collected from
December 2006 to November 2010 with a sampling frequency of 1
min.

Experimental results, based on MAE and RMSE,
showed that the proposed CNN-based method
achieves higher performance than the SVM model in
demand forecasting with 0.514% MAE versus 14.32%,
and 0.698% RMSE versus 19.23%.

Hafeez et al.
[102]

2019

Modiﬁed Mutual
Information (MMI) technique
+ FCRBM + Genetic Wind
Driven Optimization
(GWDO) algorithm

1-day

PJM electricity market

2019

RNN + LSTM

Hourly

Smart meter data of energy consumption in kWh from 112
households for 500 days with a sampling frequency of half an hour.

Kaur et al.
[103]

Khafaf et al.
[104]

2019

LSTM

Khan et al.
[105]

2019

Combine Feature Selection
Convolutional Neural
Network (CFSCNN)

Market data from the ISO New England Control Area (ISO
NE-CA) from
January 2017 to December 2017 with half-hourly
sampling frequency.

Experimental results, based on MAE and MSE,
showed better efﬁciency and accuracy of the proposed
model for demand forecasting compared to DB-SVM
(Density Based Support Vector Machine).

Historical energy consumption. For 3-day forecasts, the data
corresponds to daily consumption for each month. For 15-day
forecasts, the data corresponds to daily consumption for the
whole year.

Hourly
3-days
15-days

Half hourly
1-day
1-week
1-month

Experimental results showed that the proposed fast
and accurate model outperformed existing models
such as Multiple Instance Artiﬁcial Neural Network
(MI-ANN) and Accurate Fast Converging Short-Term
Load forecast (AFC-STLF), in terms of demand
forecasting accuracy and convergence rate. The
forecasting accuracy was improved using the MMI
technique and the FCRBM model, and the
convergence rate was enhanced with the GWDO
algorithm.

Experimental results, based on MAPE and RMSE,
showed that the proposed method gives better results
for smart homes demand forecasting than RNN and
ARIMA.

Experimental results, based on MAPE and RMSE,
showed a good performance of the proposed LSTM
model for demand forecasting.

Kim & Cho
[107]

2019

Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) based
CNN + LSTM

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

19 of 30

Table 5. Cont.

Models

Forecasting Horizon

Dataset

Outcome

Reference

Kim & Cho
[106]

Year

2019

CNN + LSTM

Minutely
Hourly
Daily
Weekly

Minutely
Hourly
Daily
Weekly

Individual household electricity consumption in the UCI Machine
Learning repository of the University of California, Irvine, which
provides a dataset of electricity consumption with 2,075,259
time-series and 12 variables
(https://archive.ics.uci.edu/mL/datasets/) (accessed on 26
November 2022). The dataset collected electricity consumption
over 4 years (from 16 December 2006 to 26 November 2010) in a
household in France.

Individual household electricity consumption in the UCI Machine
Learning repository of the University of California, Irvine, which
provides a dataset of electricity consumption with 2,075,259 time
series and 12 variables (https://archive.ics.uci.edu/mL/datasets/)
(accessed on 26 November 2022). The dataset collected electricity
consumption over 4 years (from 16 December 2006 to 26
November 2010) in a household in France.

Experimental results for smart home demand
forecasting, based on MSE, RMSE, MAE, and MAPE
showed that the proposed model outperformed other
techniques such as LSTM, GRU, B-LSTM,
Attention-based LSTM, LR, FCRBM, and CRBM.

Experimental results for smart home demand
forecasting, based on MAE and MAPE, showed a
better performance of the proposed model, which
outperformed other techniques such as LR, RF,
Regression, MLP, and CNN + LSTM (without PSO).

Experimental results for demand forecasting and
electricity prices, based on MAE and MAPE, showed
good performance of the proposed model for service
providers in purchasing energy from its various
customers to improve grid reliability and balance
energy ﬂuctuations.

Lu & Hong
[108]

2019

Reinforcement Learning (RL)
+ Deep Neural Network
(DNN)

Hourly

PJM electricity market. Data from 1 January 2017 to 21 February
2018 were used to train the model.

Pramono et al.
[109]

Rahman et al.
[110]

2019

CNN + LSTM

Hourly

Two different datasets: ENTSO-E (European Network of
Transmission System Operators for Electricity) dataset, and
ISO-NE (Independent System Operator New England) dataset.

Experimental results for demand forecasting, based on
MAE, MAPE, and RMSE, showed better performance
of the proposed model compared to other techniques.

2019

RNN + LSTM

Daily
Monthly
Yearly

Dataset containing household electricity consumption data at a
sampling frequency of 1 min from 2006 to 2010. The electricity
consumption values were
collected for different electrical appliances in the household.

Comparison of ARIMA and RNN with LSTM,
Univariate LR, and Multivariate LR. Experimental
results for demand forecasting in smart homes
showed that all models could capture the general
trend of the data, but exhibited different predictive
capabilities. Best forecasting results were obtained
with a joint method based on Mahalanobis distance.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

20 of 30

Reference

Syed et al.
[111]

Year

2019

Table 5. Cont.

Models

Forecasting Horizon

Dataset

Outcome

Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) + LSTM

1-day

Dataset containing energy consumption records for 5567
households from the UK Power Network’s Low Carbon London
project from November 2011 to February 2014.

Ustundag et al.
[112]

Vesa et al.
[113]

2019

LSTM

Hourly

PJM Data Miner 2, 1–11 March 2019 (hourly load) New Jersey,
United States.

2019

MLP + LSTM

1-day
intraday (4 h)

UK Domestic Appliance-Level Electricity (UKDALE) open-access
dataset containing historical electricity consumption readings from
5 houses over 655 days taken at a sampling rate of 6 s.

Yang et al.
[114]

2019

GRU

Hourly

Real-world smart meter dataset provided by the Irish CER. The
study used data from 800 residents and 400 SMEs with a sampling
frequency of half an hour from 1 August 2010 to 31 October 2010.

Zahid et al.
[115]

Ouyang et al.
[116]

2019

2019

CNN

DBN

Hourly

Hourly

ISO-NE dataset with 2018 load data.

One year grid load data collected in an urbanized area in Texas,
United States.

Experimental results for demand forecasting versus
temperature, humidity, dew point, wind speed and
UV Index, based on RMSE, showed better
performance of the proposed Averaging Regression
Ensembles model based on the LR and LSTM RNN
ensemble compared to other techniques such as LR
Model and Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM).

The work showed that data privacy assurance can be
obtained to varying degrees with tolerable
degradation in load forecasting results.

Experimental results for individual and aggregated
load forecasting in residential buildings, obtaining
MAE—5.60 kWh, MAPE—1.59%, and RMSE—6.19
kWh, showed high accuracy of the proposed
combined model for residential building energy
demand forecasting. The combined model
outperformed MLP and LSTM models.

Experimental results for load forecasting, based on
two typical probabilistic scoring methods (pinball loss
score, and winkler score), showed better performance
of the proposed model compared to other techniques
such as Quantile Regression Forest (QRF), Quantile
Regression Gradient Boosting (QRGB), and Quantile
Long Short-Term Memory (QLSTM) Neural Network.

Improved classiﬁers were used to forecast load and
electricity prices.

Prediction accuracy of the proposed model was
evaluated with MAPE, RMSE, and Hit Rate (HR).
Experimental results for load forecasting, examined in
four seasons independently, showed a higher
prediction accuracy of the proposed
Gumbel-Houggard Copula-DBN model, compared to
other techniques such as SVR and DBN.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

21 of 30

Reference

Hafeez et al.
[117]

Year

2018

Table 5. Cont.

Models

Forecasting Horizon

Dataset

Outcome

FCRBM + CRBM

1-week with hourly
resolution, in the middle
of each season

Publicly available Kaggle repository from the 2012 global energy
forecasting competition. The dataset consisted of hourly load (kW)
from 20 United States utility zones and temperature from 11
stations from 1 January 2004 to 30 June 2008.

Koprinska et al.
[118]

2018

CNN + LSTM

1-day

Kuo & Huang
[119]

2018

CNN + LSTM

Next 3 days

Shi et al.
[120]

2018

Pooling-based DRNN

Hourly

Ghaderi et al.
[121]

2017

RNN

Hourly

Electricity load datasets from Australia, Portugal, and Spain for
two years, 2010 and 2011 (from 1 January 2010 to 31 December
2011), with hourly sampled data. The Australian data was from
New South Wales, provided by the Australian Energy Market
Operator. The Portuguese and Spanish data were provided by the
Spanish Energy Market Operator.

United States District public consumption and electric load dataset
from 2016 provided by the Electric Reliability Council of Texas.

Data from the Smart Metering Electricity Customer Behaviour
Trials (CBTs) initiated by the Irish CER, from 1 July 2009 to 31
December 2010, involving over 5000 Irish residential and SME
consumers. Samples of half-hourly electricity consumption (kWh)
were available for each participant, as well as customer type
and tariff.

Hourly wind speed data from Meteorological Terminal Aviation
Routine (METAR) weather reports from 57 stations on the East
Coast of the United States including stations in New York,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Connecticut. A time period
from 6 January 2014 to 20 February 2014, with the most unstable
wind conditions of the entire year, was considered as test set.

Experimental results for wind speed forecasting,
based on MAE, RMSE and NRMSE, showed that the
proposed model outperformed other techniques such
as Persistence Forecasting, AR of order 1, AR of order
3 and Wavelet Transform-Artiﬁcial Neural Network
(WT-ANN).

Experimental results for load forecasting, based on
MAPE, NRMSE and correlation coefﬁcient, showed
that the proposed models were accurate and robust
compared to ANN and CNN. The adopted stacked
FCRBM achieved 99.62% accuracy with affordable
runtime and complexity.

Comparison of the performance of CNN with MLP
and LSTM RNN for photovoltaic solar power and
load forecasting. Experimental results showed that
CNN and MLP had similar accuracy and training
time, and outperformed the other models.

The load forecasting performance of the proposed
CNN-based method is compared with other
techniques such as SVM, RF, DT, MLP and LSTM.
Experimental results, based on MAPE and
Cumulative Variation of Root Mean Square Error
(CV-RMSE), showed very high forecasting accuracy
for the proposed model.

Experimental results for smart home load forecasting,
based on RMSE, showed that the proposed model
outperformed other techniques such as ARIMA by
19.5%, SVR by 13.1%, and classical deep RNN by 6.5%.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

22 of 30

Reference

Jarábek et al.
[122]

Year

2017

Table 5. Cont.

Models

LSTM

Forecasting Horizon

Dataset

Outcome

Dataset on electricity consumption of Slovak companies, collected
in the framework of the project International Centre of Excellence
for Research of Intelligent and Secure Information-Communication
Technologies and Systems, from 1 July 2013 to 16 February 2015
with a sampling frequency of 15 min. Consumption data from
11,281 enterprises were aggregated into 1152 time series
considering the enterprise’s postcode.

Research on the need for clustering when using LSTM
with Sequence to Sequence (S2S) architecture for grid
level load forecasting on real world data. A method
without clustering (simple aggregation of the
consumers) was compared with a method using
k-shape clustering. Experimental results for
aggregated load forecasting showed that more
accurate predictions were obtained using
k-shape clustering.

Proposed method considering all external factors that
inﬂuence load forecasting such as humidity,
temperature, wind speed, etc.

Li et al.
[123]

2017

CNN

Minutes

Electricity load, from January 2014 to June 2016 in a large city
in China.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

23 of 30

The search was limited to the last 6 years. The decision as to which articles were
ﬁnally included in Table 5 was made by the authors after reviewing the search results and
ensuring that the work involved the use of a Deep Learning model for demand or load
forecasting purposes.

7. Conclusions

Increasing energy demand puts pressure on the power grid to balance supply and
demand. Smart grids can play an important role. In these systems, data related to energy
use are regularly collected and analyzed to obtain energy consumption. The usage patterns
obtained can be useful for demand and load forecasting. This is a challenging task in
the context of smart environments, which is why researchers are putting special efforts
into this.

To meet today’s demand forecasting challenges, where smart grids generate large
amounts of data, it is necessary to use modern data-driven techniques. Deep Learning
based models are a good alternative. Traditionally, research has focused on forecasting
customers’ energy consumption using the small historical data sets available on their
behavior. However, current research applying Deep Learning methods has demonstrated
better performance than conventional forecasting methods. The use of Deep Learning
models involves using large amounts of data, such as those provided by the different
datasets used by practitioners in the works collected in Table 5. It is a fact that smart
grids generate large amounts of data, so Big Data is also a key technology to overcome the
challenges of renewable energy integration, load ﬂuctuation and sustainable development.
With the introduction of renewables into the smart grid, an increasing number of variables
are brought into the system and more data need to be processed. This situation is also
aggravated with the gradual introduction of electric vehicles, so these Big Data technologies
are also becoming increasingly necessary [124].

The study conducted has revealed that the most widely used Deep Learning models
in the energy domain for demand forecasting purposes are CNNs, RNNs, LSTM, DQNs,
and CRBM and a variation of any of them, a combination of two or more of them, or the
combination of any of them with other techniques. Notable are CNN and its variations
such as Pyramid-CNN [82,85,88,90,91,94,95,101,106,107,109,115,118,119,123], LSTM and its
variations such as B-LSTM [80,82,86–88,91,93–95,99,100,103,104,106,107,109–113,118,119,122],
and a combination of both [82,88,91,94,95,106,107,109,118,119]. Real testbeds with high-
quality data are not common, but are necessary to determine the performance of Deep
Leaning models. It is important to continue testing future Deep Learning models, including
potential variations and/or combinations of two or more models, for forecasting purposes
in the context of smart grids. It is also important that these tests are carried out for different
scenarios. Deep Learning models capable of automatically forecasting load for different
types of customers, premises/buildings, and different weather conditions are still needed.
It is important to test the performance of Deep Learning, but also to determine which
model is best for each scenario.

In terms of datasets, practitioners used different options, highlighting PJM electric-
ity market [32,92,102,108,112], SGSC [85,90,98], CER [98,114,120], ISO-NE [105,109,115],
Pecan Street Inc. [80,97], UCI [106,107], UKDALE [113] and REDD [21]. Many reviews
on demand/load forecasting in the context of smart grids focus on the Deep Learning
models used but forget about the data. However, for a Deep Learning implementation to
be successful, the algorithms are as valuable as the data. In fact, it would be desirable for
researchers to incorporate more information about the data used in their works, addressing
for example the training/validation/testing data split, the sampling interval of the data,
the method for data cleaning, etc. One of the limitations of using Deep Learning models
is the lack of high-quality real-world datasets. A future trend would probably be to shift
the emphasis from the model to the data. Furthermore, the authors foresee an integration
of IoT into Deep Learning models used for demand/load forecasting. IoT is enabling the
democratization of sensing. This opens exciting opportunities in terms of high-quality

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

24 of 30

data collection, which is critical in the context of demand/load forecasting. Related to this,
another future trend would be the development of integrated systems that include the
necessary data acquisition and pre-processing.

Finally, it is also remarkable that in most cases researchers focused on short-term

forecasting.

Load forecasting is a challenging task in the context of smart environments. Con-
sequently, researchers are putting special efforts into it. Real testbeds with high-quality
data are not common but necessary to determine the performance of the Deep Leaning
models. Deep Learning models capable of automatically forecasting load for different types
of customers, premises/buildings, and different weather conditions are still needed.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, methodology, writing—original draft preparation, writing—
review and editing, and supervision, J.M.A.-P. and M.Á.P.-J. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

Abbreviations

The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

Adaptive Boosting
Accurate Fast Converging Short-Term Load forecast
Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
Analysis of Variance
Auto-Regressive
Auto-Regressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity
Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average
Auto-Regressive and Moving Average
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory
Boltzmann Machines
Customer Behavior Trial
Commission for Energy Regulation
Combine Feature Selection Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network
Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machine
Cumulative Variation of Root Mean Square Error
Density Based Support Vector Machine
Deep Belief Network
Dueling Deep-Q Network
Deep Neural Network
Deep Q-Network
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Deep Recurrent Neural Network
Decision Tree
Equivalence Class Transformation
Électricité de Mayotte
Elaboration Likelihood Model

AdaBoost
AFC-STLF
ANFIS
ANN
ANOVA
AR
ARCH
ARIMA
ARMA
B-LSTM
BM
CBT
CER
CFSCNN
CNN
CRBM
CV-RMSE
DB-SVM
DBN
DDQN
DNN
DQN
DRL
DRNN
DT
ECLAT
EDM
ELM
Elman RNN Elman Recurrent Neural Network
ENTSO-E
FA

European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
Fireﬂy Algorithm

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

25 of 30

Factored Conditioned Restricted Boltzmann Machine
Frequent Pattern
Generative Adversarial Network
Gradient Boosted Regression Trees
Gross Domestic Product
Gated Recurrent Units
Genetic Wind Driven Optimization
Hit Rate
Internet of Things
Iterative Resblocks Based Deep Neural Network
Independent System Operator New England
ISO New England Control Area
K-nearest Neighbors
Linear Discriminant Analysis
Linear Regression
Long Short-Term Memory
Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Network
Mean Absolute Error
Moving Average Model
Mean Absolute Percentage Error
Meteorological Terminal Aviation Routine
Multiple Instance Artiﬁcial Neural Network
Measurement and Instrumentation Data Centre
Multilayer Perceptron
Modiﬁed Mutual Information
Multitask Bayesian Neural Network
Naive Bayes
Non-Linear Regression
Normalized Root Mean Squared Error
Ordinary Least Squares Regression
Principal Components Analysis
Probability Distribution Function
Prediction Interval Coverage Percentage
Partial Least-Square
Pooling-based Long Short-Term Memory
Particle Swarm Optimization

FCRBM
F-P
GAN
GBRT
GDP
GRU
GWDO
HR
IoT
IRBDNN
ISO-NE
ISO NECA
KNN
LDA
LR
LSTM
LSTM-RNN
MAE
MAM
MAPE
METAR
MI-ANN
MIDC
MLP
MMI
MT-BNN
NB
NLR
NRMSE
OLS
PCA
PDF
PICP
PLS
PLSTM
PSO
Pyramid-CNN Pyramid Convolutional Neural Network
QLSTM
QRF
QRGB
RBM
REDD
RF
RFE
RL
RMSE
RNN
RTPIS
S2S
SD
SGD
SGSC
SME
SS
SVM
SVR
UKDALE
WT-ANN
XGBoost

Quantile Long Short-Term Memory
Quantile Regression Forest
Quantile Regression Gradient Boosting
Restricted Boltzmann Machine
Reference Energy Disaggregation Data Set
Random Forest
Recursive Feature Elimination
Reinforcement Learning
Root Mean Squared Error
Recurrent Neural Network
Real-Time Power and Intelligent Systems
Sequence to Sequence
Spectral Decomposition
Stochastic Gradient Descent
Smart Grid Smart City
Small and Medium Enterprise
State-Space
Support Vector Machine
Support Vector Regression
UK Domestic Appliance-Level Electricity
Wavelet Transform-Artiﬁcial Neural Network
Extreme Gradient Boosting

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

References

26 of 30

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

Butt, O.M.; Zulqarnain, M.; Butt, T.M. Recent advancement in smart grid technology: Future prospects in the electrical power
network. Ain Shams Eng. J. 2021, 12, 687–695. [CrossRef]
Cecati, C.; Mokryani, G.; Piccolo, A.; Siano, P. An Overview on the Smart Grid Concept. In Proceedings of the IECON 2010—36th
Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Glendale, CA, USA, 7–10 November 2010; pp. 3322–3327.
Vakulenko, I.; Saher, L.; Lyulyov, O.; Pimonenko, T. A Systematic Literature Review of Smart Grids. In Proceedings of the 1st
Conference on Traditional and Renewable Energy Sources: Perspectives and Paradigms for the 21st Century (TRESP 2021),
Prague, Czech Republic, 22–23 January 2021; Volume 250. [CrossRef]
Yan, Y.; Qian, Y.; Sharif, H.; Tipper, D. A survey on cyber security for smart grid communications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor.
2012, 14, 998–1010. [CrossRef]
Shawkat Ali, A.B.M.; Azad, S.A. Demand forecasting in smart grid. Green Energy Technol. 2013, 132, 135–150. [CrossRef]
Prabadevi, B.; Pham, Q.-V.; Liyanage, M.; Deepa, N.; Vvss, M.; Reddy, S.; Madikunta, P.K.R.; Khare, N.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Hwang,
W.H. Deep learning for intelligent demand response and smart grids: A comprehensive survey. arXiv 2021. [CrossRef]
Ferreira, H.C.; Lampe, L.; Newbury, J.; Swart, T.G. Power Line Communications. Theory and Applications for Narrowband and
Broadband Communications Over Power Lines; John Wiley and Sons: Chichester, UK, 2010.
Vanting, N.B.; Ma, Z.; Jørgensen, B.N. A scoping review of deep neural networks for electric load forecasting. Energy Inform. 2021,
4, 49. [CrossRef]

9. Hernández, L.; Baladrón, C.; Aguiar, J.M.; Carro, B.; Sánchez-Esguevillas, A.J.; Lloret, J.; Massana, J. A survey on electric power
demand forecasting: Future trends in smart grids, microgrids and smart buildings. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2014, 16, 1460–1495.
[CrossRef]
Javed, F.; Arshad, N.; Wallin, F.; Vassileva, I.; Dahlquist, E. Forecasting for demand response in smart grids: An analysis on use of
anthropologic and structural data and short-term multiple loads forecasting. Appl. Energy 2012, 96, 150–160. [CrossRef]

10.

11. Khodayar, M.E.; Wu, H. Demand forecasting in the smart grid paradigm: Features and challenges. Electr. J. 2015, 28, 51–62.

[CrossRef]

12. Boza, P.; Evgeniou, T. Artiﬁcial intelligence to support the integration of variable renewable energy sources to the power system.

Appl. Energy 2021, 290, 116754. [CrossRef]

13. Lasseter, R.; Akhil, A.; Mamy, C.; Stephens, J.; Dagle, J.; Guttromson, R.; Meliopoulous, A.S.; Yinger, R.; Eto, J. Integration of
Distributed Energy Resources. The CERTS Microgrid Concept. White Paper. 2003. Available online: https://certs.lbl.gov/
publications/integration-distributed-energy (accessed on 20 November 2022).

14. Anduaga, J.; Boyra, M.; Cobelo, I.; García, E.; Gil, A.; Jimeno, J.; Laresgoiti, I.; Oyarzabal, J.M.; Rodríguez, R.; Sánchez, E.;
et al. La Microrred, Una Alternativa de Futuro Para un Suministro Energético Integral; TECNALIA, Corporación Tecnológica: Derio,
Spain, 2008.

15. Hoy, M.B. Smart buildings: An introduction to the library of the future. Med. Ref. Serv. Q. 2016, 35, 326–331. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fang, X.; Misra, S.; Xue, G.; Yang, D. Smart grid—The new and improved power grid: A Survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2012,
16.
14, 944–980. [CrossRef]
Singh, A.; Nasiruddin, I.; Khatoon, S.; Muazzam, M.; Chaturvedi, D.K. Load Forecasting Techniques and Methodologies: A
Review. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Power, Control and Embedded Systems (ICPCES), Allahabad,
India, 17–19 December 2012. [CrossRef]

17.

18. Nti, I.K.; Teimeh, M.; Nyarko-Boateng, O.; Adekoya, A.F. Electricity load forecasting: A systematic review. J. Electr. Syst. Inf.

Technol. 2020, 7, 13. [CrossRef]

19. Ahmed Mir, A.; Alghassab Kafait, M.; Ullah, K.; Ali Khan, Z.; Lu, Y.; Imran, M. A review of electricity demand forecasting in low

and middle income countries: The demand determinants and horizons. Sustainability 2020, 12, 5931. [CrossRef]

20. Clements, A.E.; Hurn, A.S.; Li, Z. Forecasting day-ahead electricity load using a multiple equation time series approach. Eur. J.

Oper. Res. 2016, 251, 522–530. [CrossRef]

21. Hong, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Li, Q.; Xu, W.; Zheng, X. A deep learning method for short-term residential load forecasting in smart grid.

IEEE Access 2020, 8, 55785–55797. [CrossRef]

22. Phuangpornpitak, N.; Prommee, W. A study of load demand forecasting models in electric power system operation and planning.

GMSARN Int. J. 2016, 10, 19–24.

23. Xiao, L.; Shao, W.; Liang, T.; Wang, C. A combined model based on multiple seasonal patterns and modiﬁed ﬁreﬂy algorithm for

electrical load forecasting. Appl. Energy 2016, 167, 135–153. [CrossRef]

24. Xue, B.; Geng, J. Dynamic Transverse Correction Method of Middle and Long-term Energy Forecasting based on Statistic of
Forecasting Errors. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Power and Energy (IPEC), Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam, 12–14 December
2012; pp. 253–256. [CrossRef]

25. Khatoon, S.; Nasiruddin, I.; Singh, A.; Gupta, P. Effects of Various Factors on Electric Load Forecasting: An Overview. In

Proceedings of the IEEE Power India International Conference (PIICON), Delhi, India, 5–7 December 2014; pp. 1–5.

26. Hippert, H.S.; Pedreira, C.E.; Souza, R.C. Neural networks for short-term load forecasting: A review and evaluation. IEEE Trans.

Power Syst. 2001, 16, 44–55. [CrossRef]
Fahad, M.U.; Arbab, N. Factor affecting short term load forecasting. J. Clean Energy Technol. 2014, 2, 305–309. [CrossRef]

27.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

27 of 30

28. Novianto, D.; Gao, W.; Kuroki, S. Review on people’s lifestyle and energy consumption of Asian communities: Case study of

Indonesia, Thailand, and China. Energy Power Eng. 2015, 7, 465. [CrossRef]

30.

29. Hernández, L.; Baladrón, C.; Aguiar, J.M.; Calavia, L.; Carro, B.; Sánchez-Esguevillas, A.; García, P.; Lloret, J. Experimental
analysis of the input variables’ relevance to forecast next day’s aggregated electric demand using neural networks. Energies 2013,
6, 2927–2948. [CrossRef]
Issi, F.; Kaplan, O. The determination of load proﬁles and power consumptions of home appliances. Energies 2018, 11, 607.
[CrossRef]
Shi, Y.; Yu, T.; Liu, Q.; Zhu, H.; Li, F.; Wu, Y. An approach of electrical load proﬁle analysis based on time series data mining. IEEE
Access 2020, 8, 209915–209925. [CrossRef]

31.

32. Hafeez, G.; Alimgeer, K.S.; Khan, I. Electric load forecasting based on deep learning and optimized by heuristic algorithm in

smart grid. Appl. Energy 2020, 269, 114915. [CrossRef]

33. Gillies, D.K.A.; Bernholtz, B.; Sandiford, P.J. A new approach to forecasting daily peak loads. Trans. Am. Inst. Electr. Eng. Part III

Power Appar. Syst. 1956, 75, 382–387. [CrossRef]

34. Park, D.C.; El-Sharkawi, M.A.; Marks II, R.J.; Atlas, L.E.; Damborg, M.J. Electric load forecasting using an artiﬁcial neural network.

IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 1991, 6, 442–449. [CrossRef]

35. Bakirtzis, A.G.; Petridis, V.; Kiartzis, S.J.; Alexiadis, M.C.; Maissis, A.H. A neural network short term load forecasting model for

the Greek power system. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 1995, 11, 858–863. [CrossRef]

36. Lu, C.-N.; Wu, H.-T.; Vemuri, S. Neural network based short term load forecasting. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 1993, 8, 336–342.

[CrossRef]

37. Papalexopoulos, A.D.; Hao, S.; Peng, T.-M. An implementation of a neural network based load forecasting models for the EMS.

IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 1994, 9, 1956–1962. [CrossRef]

38. Wang, P. On deﬁning artiﬁcial intelligence. J. Artif. Gen. Intell. 2019, 10, 1–37. [CrossRef]
39. Ongsulee, P. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Deep Learning. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on

ICT and Knowledge Engineering (ICT&KE), Bangkok, Thailand, 22–24 November 2017; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]

40. Raz, A.R.; Llinas, J.; Mittu, R.; Lawless, W.F. Engineering for emergence in information fusion systems: A review of some
challenges. In Human-Machine Shared Contexts; Lawless, W.F., Mittu, R., Sofge, D.A., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA,
2020; pp. 241–255, ISBN 9780128205433. [CrossRef]

41. Cohen, S. The basics of machine learning: Strategies and techniques. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Deep Learning in Pathology;

Cohen, S., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2021; pp. 13–40, ISBN 9780323675383. [CrossRef]

42. Bonetto, R.; Latzko, V. Machine learning. In Computing in Communication Networks, From Theory to Practice; Fitzek, F.H.P., Granelli,

F., Seeling, P., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020; pp. 135–167, ISBN 9780128204887. [CrossRef]

43. Delua, J. Supervised vs. Unsupervised Learning: What’s the Difference? 2021. Available online: https://www.ibm.com/cloud/

44.

blog/supervised-vs-unsupervised-learning (accessed on 15 November 2022).
Sarker, I.H. Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world applications and research directions. SN Comput. Sci. 2021, 2, 160.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

45. Choi, R.Y.; Coyner, A.S.; Kalpathy-Cramer, J.; Chiang, M.F.; Campbell, J.P. Introduction to machine learning, neural networks,

and deep learning. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 2020, 9, 14. [CrossRef]

46. Alloghani, M.; Al-Jumeily, D.; Mustaﬁna, J.; Hussain, A.; Aljaaf, A.J. A systematic review on supervised and unsupervised
machine learning algorithms for data science. In Supervised and Unsupervised Learning for Data Science; Berry, M., Mohamed, A.,
Yap, B., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 3–21. [CrossRef]
Satinet, C.; Fouss, F. A supervised machine learning classiﬁcation framework for clothing products’ sustainability. Sustainability
2022, 14, 1334. [CrossRef]
Jiang, T.; Gradus, J.L.; Rosellini, A.J. Supervised machine learning: A brief primer. Behav. Ther. 2020, 51, 675–687. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

48.

47.

49. El Bouchefry, K.; de Souza, R.S. Learning in big data: Introduction to machine learning. In Knowledge Discovery in Big Data
from Astronomy and Earth Observation; Škoda, P., Adam, F., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; pp. 225–249,
ISBN 9780128191545. [CrossRef]

50. Uddamari, N.; Ubbana, J. A study on unsupervised learning algorithms analysis in machine learning. Turk. J. Comput. Math. Educ.

2021, 12, 6774–6782.

51. Khanum, M.; Mahboob, T.; Imtiaz, W.; Ghafoor, H.; Sehar, R. A survey on unsupervised machine learning algorithms for

automation, classiﬁcation and maintenance. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2015, 119, 34–39. [CrossRef]

52. Avinash, K.; William, G.; Ryan, B. Network Attack Detection Using an Unsupervised Machine Learning Algorithm. In Proceedings

of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Maui, HI, USA, 7–10 January 2020. [CrossRef]

53. Chen, Y.; Kong, R.; Kong, L. Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in astronomical big data. In Big Data in Astronomy; Kong, L.,
Huang, T., Zhu, Y., Yu, S., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; pp. 347–375, ISBN 9780128190845. [CrossRef]

54. Van Engelen, J.E.; Hoos, H.H. A survey on semi-supervised learning. Mach. Learn. 2020, 109, 373–440. [CrossRef]
55. ZhongKaizhu, G.; Huang, H. Semisupervised Learning: Background, Applications and Future Directions; Nova Science Publishers:

New York, NY, USA, 2018.

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

28 of 30

56. Huynh, T.; Nibali, A.; He, Z. Semisupervised learning for medical image classiﬁcation using imbalanced training data. Comput.

Methods Programs Biomed. 2022, 216, 106628. [CrossRef]

57. Kaur, A.; Gourav, K. A study of reinforcement learning applications & its algorithms. Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res. 2020, 9, 4223–4228.
58. Mohammed, M.; Khan, M.B.; Bashier Mohammed, B.E. Machine Learning: Algorithms and Applications; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL,

USA, 2016.

59. Tanveer, J.; Haider, A.; Ali, R.; Kim, A. An overview of reinforcement learning algorithms for handover management in 5G

ultra-dense small cell networks. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 426. [CrossRef]

60. Liu, S.; See, K.C.; Ngiam, K.Y.; Celi, L.A.; Sun, X.; Feng, M. Reinforcement learning for clinical decision support in critical care:

Comprehensive review. J. Med. Internet Res. 2020, 22, e18477. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

61. Hao, X.; Zhang, G.; Ma, S. Deep learning. Int. J. Semant. Comput. 2016, 10, 417–439. [CrossRef]
62. Nichols, J.A.; Herbert Chan, H.W.; Baker, M. Machine learning: Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence to imaging and diagnosis.

63.

Biophys. Rev. 2019, 11, 111–118. [CrossRef]
Sadiq, R.; Rodríguez, M.J.; Mian, H.R. Empirical models to predict Disinfection By-Products (DBPs) in drinking water: An
updated review. In Encyclopedia of Environmental Health, 2nd ed.; Nriagu, J., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019; pp.
324–338, ISBN 978-0-444-63952-3.

64. Teuwen, J.; Moriakov, N. Convolutional neural networks. In Handbook of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Interven-
tion; Zhou, S.K., Rueckert, D., Fichtinger, G., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; pp. 481–501, ISBN 9780128161760.
[CrossRef]

65. He, Z. Deep Learning in Image Classiﬁcation: A Survey Report. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Information

Technology and Computer Application (ITCA), Guangzhou, China, 18–20 December 2020; pp. 174–177. [CrossRef]

66. Khan, A.; Sohail, A.; Zahoora, U.; Qureshi, A.S. A survey of the recent architectures of deep convolutional neural networks. Artif.

Intell. Rev. 2020, 53, 5455–5516. [CrossRef]

67. Cho, K.; van Merrienboer, B.; Bahdanau, D.; Bengio, Y. On the Properties of Neural Machine Translation: Encoder-Decoder

Approaches. arXiv 2014, arXiv:1409.1259.

68. Elman, J. Finding structure in time. Cogn. Sci. 1990, 14, 179–211. [CrossRef]
69. Toha, S.F.; Tokhi, M.O. MLP and Elman Recurrent Neural Network Modelling for the TRMS. In Proceedings of the 7th IEEE

International Conference on Cybernetic Intelligent Systems, London, UK, 9–10 September 2008; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]

70. Liu, Y.; Guo, J.; Cai, C.; Wang, Y.; Jia, L. Short-Term Forecasting of Rail Transit Passenger Flow Based on Long Short-Term Memory
Neural Network. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Rail Transportation (ICIRT), Singapore, 12–14
December 2018; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]

71. Zhao, Z.; Liang, Y.; Jin, X. Handling Large-Scale Action Space in Deep Q Network. In Proceedings of the International Conference

on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data (ICAIBD), Chengdu, China, 26–28 May 2018; pp. 93–96. [CrossRef]

72. Xie, W.; Ouyang, Y.; Ouyang, J.; Rong, W.; Xiong, Z. User Occupation Aware Conditional Restricted Boltzmann Machine
Based Recommendation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green
Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data
(SmartData), Chengdu, China, 15–18 December 2016; pp. 454–461. [CrossRef]

73. Taylor, G.W.; Hinton, G.E.; Roweis, S.T. Two distributed-state models for generating high-dimensional time series. J. Mach. Learn.

Res. 2011, 12, 1025–1068.

74. Hinton, G.E.; Osindero, S.; Teh, Y.W. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural Comput. 2006, 18, 1527–1554. [CrossRef]
75. Bedi, G.; Venayagamoorthy, G.K.; Singh, R. Development of an IoT-driven building environment for prediction of electric energy

consumption. IEEE Internet Things J. 2020, 7, 4912–4921. [CrossRef]

77.

76. Timur, O.; Zor, K.; Çelik, Ö.; Teke, A.; ˙Ibrikçi, T. Application of statistical and artiﬁcial intelligence techniques for medium-term
electrical energy forecasting: A case study for a regional hospital. J. Sustain. Dev. Energy Water Environ. Syst. 2020, 8, 520–536.
[CrossRef]
Selvi, M.V.; Mishra, S. Investigation of Weather Inﬂuence in Day-Ahead Hourly Electric Load Power Forecasting with New
Architecture Realized in Multivariate Linear Regression Artiﬁcial Neural Network Techniques. In Proceedings of the 8th IEEE
India International Conference on Power Electronics (IICPE), Jaipur, India, 13–15 December 2018.
Selvi, M.V.; Mishra, S. Investigation of performance of electric load power forecasting in multiple time horizons with new
architecture realized in multivariate linear regression and feed-forward neural network techniques. IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 2020,
56, 5603–5612. [CrossRef]

78.

79. Eseye, A.T.; Lehtonen, M.; Tukia, T.; Uimonen, S.; Millar, R.J. Machine learning based integrated feature selection approach for

improved electricity demand forecasting in decentralized energy systems. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 91463–91475. [CrossRef]

80. Wen, L.; Zhou, K.; Yang, S. Load demand forecasting of residential buildings using a deep learning model. Electr. Power Syst. Res.

2020, 179, 106073. [CrossRef]

81. Rodríguez, F.; Galarza, A.; Vasquez, J.C.; Guerrero, J.M. Using deep learning and meteorological parameters to forecast the

photovoltaic generators intra-hour output power interval for smart grid control. Energy 2022, 239, 122116. [CrossRef]

82. Taleb, I.; Guerard, G.; Fauberteau, F.; Nguyen, N.A. Flexible deep learning method for energy forecasting. Energies 2022, 15, 3926.

[CrossRef]

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

29 of 30

83. Xu, A.; Tian, M.-W.; Firouzi, B.; Alattas, K.A.; Mohammadzadeh, A.; Ghaderpour, E. A new deep learning Restricted Boltzmann

Machine for energy consumption forecasting. Sustainability 2022, 14, 10081. [CrossRef]

84. Yem Souhe, F.G.; Franklin Mbey, C.; Teplaira Boum, A.; Ele, P.; Foba Kakeu, V.J. A hybrid model for forecasting the consumption

of electrical energy in a smart grid. J. Eng. 2022, 6, 629–643. [CrossRef]

85. Aurangzeb, K.; Alhussein, M.; Javed, K.; Haider, S.I. A Pyramid-CNN based deep learning model for power load forecasting of

86.

similar-proﬁle energy customers based on clustering. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 14992–15003. [CrossRef]
Jahangir, H.; Tayarani, H.; Gougheri, S.S.; Golkar, M.A.; Ahmadian, A.; Elkamel, A. Deep learning-based forecasting approach in
smart grids with microclustering and bidirectional LSTM network. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2021, 68, 8298–8309. [CrossRef]
87. Mubashar, R.; Awan, M.J.; Ahsan, M.; Yasin, A.; Singh, V.P. Efﬁcient residential load forecasting using deep learning approach.

Int. J. Comput. Appl. Technol. 2022, 68, 205–214. [CrossRef]

88. Rosato, A.; Araneo, R.; Andreotti, A.; Panella, M. 2-D Convolutional Deep Neural Network for Multivariate Energy Time Series
Prediction. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Environment and Electrical Engineering and 2019 IEEE
Industrial and Commercial Power Systems Europe (EEEIC/I&CPS Europe), Genova, Italy, 11–14 June 2019.

89. Zhang, X.; Biagioni, D.; Cai, M.; Graf, P.; Rahman, S. An edge-cloud integrated solution for buildings demand response using

reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2020, 12, 420–431. [CrossRef]

90. Aurangzeb, K.; Alhussein, M. Deep Learning Framework for Short-term Power Load Forecasting, a Case Study of Individual
Household Energy Customer. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Advances in the Emerging Computing
Technologies (AECT), Al Madinah Al Munawwarah, Saudi Arabia, 10 February 2020.

91. Escobar, E.; Rodríguez Licea, M.A.; Rostro-Gonzalez, H.; Espinoza Calderon, A.; Barranco Gutiérrez, A.I.; Pérez-Pinal, F.J.
Comparative Analysis of Multivariable Deep Learning Models for Forecasting in Smart Grids. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE
International Autumn Meeting on Power, Electronics and Computing (ROPEC), Ixtapa, Mexico, 4–6 November 2020. [CrossRef]
92. Hafeez, G.; Alimgeer, K.S.; Wadud, Z.; Shaﬁq, Z.; Ali Khan, M.U.; Khan, I.; Khan, F.A.; Derhab, A. A novel accurate and fast
converging deep learning-based model for electrical energy consumption forecasting in a smart grid. Energies 2020, 13, 2244.
[CrossRef]

93. Nguyen, V.-B.; Duong, M.-T.; Le, M.-H. Electricity Demand Forecasting for Smart Grid based on Deep Learning Approach. In
Proceedings of the 2020 5th International Conference on Green Technology and Sustainable Development (GTSD), Ho Chi Minh
City, Vietnam, 27–28 November 2020; pp. 353–357. [CrossRef]

94. Rosato, A.; Succetti, F.; Araneo, R.; Andreotti, A.; Mitolo, M.; Panella, M. A Combined Deep Learning Approach for Time Series
Prediction in Energy Environments. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE/IAS 56th Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
Technical Conference (I&CPS), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 29 June–28 July 2020.

95. Qi, X.; Zheng, X.; Chen, Q. A Short-term Load Forecasting of Integrated Energy System based on CNN-LSTM. In Proceedings of
the 2020 International Conference on Energy, Environment and Bioengineering (ICEEB 2020), Xi’an, China, 7–9 August 2020;
Volume 185, p. 01032. [CrossRef]

96. Wang, B.; Li, Y.; Ming, W.; Wang, S. Deep reinforcement learning method for demand response management of interruptible load.

IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2020, 11, 3146–3155. [CrossRef]

97. Wen, L.; Zhou, K.; Li, J.; Wang, S. Modiﬁed deep learning and reinforcement learning for an incentive-based demand response

model. Energy 2020, 205, 118019. [CrossRef]

98. Yang, Y.; Li, W.; Gulliver, T.A.; Li, S. Bayesian deep learning-based probabilistic load forecasting in smart grids. IEEE Trans Ind.

Inf. 2020, 16, 4703–4713. [CrossRef]

99. Amin, P.; Cherkasova, L.; Aitken, R.; Kache, V. Automating Energy Demand Modeling and Forecasting Using Smart Meter Data.

In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Congress on Internet of Things (ICIOT), Milan, Italy, 8–13 July 2019.

100. Atef, S.; Eltawil, A.B. A Comparative Study Using Deep Learning and Support Vector Regression for Electricity Price Forecasting
in Smart Grids. In Proceedings of the IEEE 6th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Applications (ICIEA),
Tokyo, Japan, 12–15 April 2019; pp. 603–607. [CrossRef]

101. Chan, S.; Oktavianti, I.; Puspita, V. A Deep Learning CNN and AI-Tuned SVM for Electricity Consumption Forecasting:
Multivariate Time Series Data. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 10th annual information technology, Electronics and Mobile
Communication Conference (IEMCON), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 17–19 October 2019.

102. Hafeez, G.; Javaid, N.; Riaz, M.; Ali, A.; Umar, K.; Iqbal, Q.Z. Day Ahead Electric Load Forecasting by an Intelligent Hybrid
Model based on Deep Learning for Smart Grid. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and
Software Intensive Systems (CISIS-2020), Lodz, Poland, 1–3 July 2020.

103. Kaur, D.; Kumar, R.; Kumar, N.; Guizani, M. Smart Grid Energy Management using RNN-LSTM: A Deep Learning-Based
Approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Big Island, HI, USA, 9–13 December
2019; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]

104. Al Khafaf, N.; Jalili, M.; Sokolowski, P. Application of deep learning long short-term memory in energy demand forecasting.

Commun. Comput. Inf. Sci. 2019, 1000, 31–42.

105. Khan, A.B.M.; Khan, S.; Aimal, S.; Khan, M.; Ruqia, B.; Javaid, N. Half hourly electricity load forecasting using convolutional
neural network. In Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing; Barolli, L., Xhafa, F., Hussain, O., Eds.; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland; Volume 994. [CrossRef]

Sensors 2023, 23, 1467

30 of 30

106. Kim, T.Y.; Cho, S.B. Predicting residential energy consumption using CNN-LSTM neural networks. Energy 2019, 182, 72–81.

[CrossRef]

107. Kim, T.; Cho, S. Particle Swarm Optimization-based CNN-LSTM Networks for Forecasting Energy Consumption. In Proceedings

of the 2019 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), Wellington, New Zealand, 10–13 June 2019.

108. Lu, R.; Hong, S.H. Incentive-based demand response for smart grid with reinforcement learning and deep neural network. Appl.

Energy 2019, 236, 937–949. [CrossRef]

109. Pramono, S.H.; Rohmatillah, M.; Maulana, E.; Hasanah, R.N.; Hario, F. Deep learning-based short-term load forecasting for

supporting demand response program in hybrid energy system. Energies 2019, 12, 3359. [CrossRef]

110. Rahman, S.; Alam, M.G.R.; Rahman, M.M. Deep Learning based Ensemble Method for Household Energy Demand Forecasting
of Smart Home. In Proceedings of the 2019 22nd International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT),
Dhaka, Bangladesh, 18–20 December 2019.

111. Syed, D.; Refaat, S.S.; Abu-Rub, H.; Bouhali, O.; Zainab, A.; Xie, L. Averaging Ensembles Model for Forecasting of Short-Term
Load in Smart Grids. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Los Angeles, CA, USA, 9–12
December 2019; pp. 2931–2938. [CrossRef]

112. Ustundag Soykan, E.; Bilgin, Z.; Ersoy, M.A.; Tomur, E. Differentially Private Deep Learning for Load Forecasting on Smart
Grid. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Waikoloa, HI, USA, 9–13 December 2019; pp. 1–6.
[CrossRef]

113. Vesa, A.V.; Ghitescu, N.; Pop, C.; Antal, M.; Cioara, T.; Anghel, I.A.; Salomie, I. Stacking Ulti-Learning Ensemble Model
for Predicting Near Real Time Energy Consumption Demand of Residential Buildings.
In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE
15th International Conference on Intelligent Computer Communication and Processing (ICCP), Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 5–7
September 2019.

114. Yang, Y.; Hong, W.; Li, S. Deep ensemble learning based probabilistic load forecasting in smart grids. Energy 2019, 189, 116324.

[CrossRef]

115. Zahid, M.; Ahmed, F.; Javaid, N.; Abbasi, R.A.; Zainab Kazmi, H.S.; Javaid, A.; Bilal, M.; Akbar, M.; Ilahi, M. Electricity price and
load forecasting using enhanced convolutional neural network enhanced support vector regression in smart grids. Electronics
2019, 8, 122. [CrossRef]

116. Ouyang, T.; He, Y.; Li, H.; Sun, Z.; Baek, S. Modeling and forecasting short-term power load with copula model and deep belief

network. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell. 2019, 3, 127–136. [CrossRef]

117. Hafeez, G.; Javaid, N.; Ullah, S.; Iqbal, Q.Z.; Khan, M.; Rehman, A.U.; Ullah, Z. Short-Term Load Forecasting based on Deep
Learning for Smart Grid Applications. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet
Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS-2018), Matsue, Japan, 4–6 July 2018. [CrossRef]

118. Koprinska, I.; Wu, D.; Wang, Z. Convolutional Neural Networks for Energy Time Series Forecasting. In Proceedings of the 2018

International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 8–13 July 2018.

119. Kuo, P.H.; Huang, C.J. A high precision artiﬁcial neural networks model for short-Term energy load forecasting. Energies 2018, 11,

213. [CrossRef]

120. Shi, H.; Xu, M.; Li, R. Deep learning of household load forecasting—A novel pooling deep RNN. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2018, 9,

5271–5280. [CrossRef]

121. Ghaderi, A.; Sanandaji, B.M.; Ghaderi, F. Deep forecast: Deep learning-based spatio-temporal forecasting. arXiv 2017. [CrossRef]
122. Jarábek, T.; Laurinec, P.; Lucká, M. Energy Load Forecast using S2S Deep Neural Networks with k-Shape Clustering. In Proceed-
ings of the 2017 IEEE 14th International Scientiﬁc Conference on Informatics 2017, Poprad, Slovakia, 14–16 November 2017.
123. Li, L.; Ota, K.; Dong, M. Everything is Image: CNN-Based Short-Term Electrical Load Forecasting for Smart Grid. In Proceedings of
the 2017 14th International Symposium on Pervasive Systems, Algorithms and Networks & 2017 11th International Conference on
Frontier of Computer Science and Technology & 2017 Third International Symposium of Creative Computing (ISPAN-FCST-ISCC),
Exeter, UK, 21–23 June 2017; pp. 344–351. [CrossRef]

124. Zhan, J.; Huang, J.; Niu, L.; Peng, X.; Deng, D.; Cheng, S. Study of the Key Technologies of Electric Power Big Data and Its
Application Prospects in Smart Grid. In Proceedings of the IEEE PES Asia-Paciﬁc Power and Energy Engineering Conference
(APPEEC), Hong Kong, China, 7–10 December 2014; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

