ARTICLE

https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

OPEN

A qualitative investigation of ﬁnancial decision-
making and enabling factors among ethnic minority
young adults in Hong Kong
Esther Yin-Nei Cho1✉

;
,
:
)
(
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Current understanding of ﬁnancial decision-making among racial/ethnic minority young
adults is limited: day-to-day ﬁnancial decisions of racial/ethnic minorities are underexamined,
younger racial/ethnic minorities receive limited attention, studies on racial/ethnic minorities
are mainly conducted in Western societies, and research on ﬁnancial literacy and decision-
making is predominantly quantitative in nature. Against this backdrop, this study utilized a
qualitative approach to examine a range of ﬁnancial decision-making among ethnic minority
young adults in Hong Kong, including personal budgeting, spending, ﬁnancial planning, the
use of ﬁnancial products, debt management, and the detection of ﬁnancial fraud. Individual
interviews were conducted with 53 Pakistani, Indian, Nepalese, and Filipino participants aged
18 to 29 who employed various budgeting strategies and faced challenges. Their spending
was modest, and they espoused various spending philosophies. Many saved approximately
one-third of their income using saving tactics and setting ﬁnancial goals, and investing in both
Hong Kong and their home countries. Informal borrowing was common, though some sought
alternative loans. One-third used credit cards, with accompanying occasional risks. Despite
employing protective tactics, they still fell victim to scams. Factors facilitating their ﬁnancial
decision-making include family social capital, intrapersonal characteristics, social dynamics
factors, command of knowledge, and facilitative contextual circumstances. This study
addresses knowledge gaps by providing an in-depth understanding of ﬁnancial decision-
making among ethnic minority young adults in a non-Western context. It has signiﬁcant
implications for timely and tailored ﬁnancial literacy education for minority societal members.

1 Children and Youth Research Centre and Felizberta Lo Padilla Tong School of Social Sciences, Saint Francis University, Hong Kong, China.

✉

email: echo@sfu.edu.hk

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

1

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

IntroductionExtensive attention has been given to studying and promot-

ing ﬁnancial literacy, as shown by the burgeoning literature
on the subject (e.g., Angrisani et al., 2021; Atkinson and
Messy, 2012; Kempson, 2009; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007),
ﬁnancial
literacy incorporated as a national priority (OECD,
2015a), and the proliferation of ﬁnancial education programs
worldwide (Kaiser and Menkhoff, 2020). The primary reason for
this attention and effort lies in the growing awareness of the
generally low levels of ﬁnancial literacy across the world (e.g.,
Lusardi, 2019; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a) and its impact on
ﬁnancial well-being, which, in turn, inﬂuences overall individual
and societal well-being (Grohmann et al., 2018).

There is no universal deﬁnition of ﬁnancial literacy, but the
deﬁnitions used in the literature are essentially similar (e.g.,
Atkinson and Messy, 2012; Hung et al., 2009; OECD, 2015b). For
instance, ﬁnancial literacy is deﬁned as the “knowledge of basic
economic and ﬁnancial concepts, as well as the ability to use that
knowledge and other ﬁnancial skills to manage ﬁnancial resources
effectively for a lifetime of ﬁnancial well-being” (Hung et al.,
2009, p.12) or “a combination of awareness, knowledge, skill,
attitude, and behavior necessary to make sound ﬁnancial deci-
sions and ultimately achieve individual ﬁnancial well-being”
(Atkinson and Messy, 2012, p.14). The terms “ﬁnancial literacy”
and “ﬁnancial capability” are often used interchangeably (e.g.,
Muir et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2014), referring to the ability to apply
appropriate ﬁnancial knowledge and engage in ﬁnancial beha-
viors to achieve ﬁnancial well-being (Xiao et al., 2014), though it
may also include access to ﬁnancial resources (Johnson and
Sherraden, 2007).

These slightly different deﬁnitions converge around three inter-
related ideas. First, ﬁnancial literacy consists of basic elements, such
as knowledge, attitudes, skills, and behavior, necessary for making
ﬁnancial decisions. Second, it involves the ability to apply these ele-
ments for sound ﬁnancial decision-making. Third, ﬁnancial literacy
ultimately affects ﬁnancial well-being through improved ﬁnancial
decision-making. Therefore, the extent of individuals’ ﬁnancial lit-
eracy is not merely determined by their knowledge but also by how
well they apply knowledge in their decision-making, which requires
practice and judgement (Worthington, 2006). To fully understand
people’s ﬁnancial
it is also necessary to examine their
ﬁnancial decisions in terms of both their practice and perceptions.
literacy among different population
groups have been documented based on characteristics such as
age, gender, education, race/ethnicity, income level, and marital
status (e.g., Brown and Graf, 2013; Lusardi et al., 2010; Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2011a, 2011b). Racial/ethnic minorities comprise
one of the most vulnerable groups (Al-Bahrani et al., 2019;
Angrisani et al., 2021; Brown and Graf, 2013; Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2011b). For example, Black and Hispanic individuals in
the USA tend to score lower on ﬁnancial literacy questions than
Whites (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b). While it is recognized that
racial/ethnic minorities have lower levels of ﬁnancial knowledge,
a more comprehensive understanding of their ﬁnancial literacy is
still needed.

Disparities in ﬁnancial

First, racial/ethnic minorities’ ﬁnancial decision-making has
not been sufﬁciently examined. Existing studies focus on banking
accounts (Barcellos and Zamarro, 2021; Kim et al., 2016; Lusardi,
2005), credit use and debts (Ekanem, 2013; Gaur et al., 2020;
Goodstein et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2011), asset holding (Lusardi,
2005), and retirement planning (Kim et al., 2021). Other
important day-to-day ﬁnancial decisions are less understood,
such as budgeting, savings, using other ﬁnancial products, and
detecting ﬁnancial fraud.

literacy,

Second, younger members of racial/ethnic minorities, who face
double challenges, have received limited attention. As racial/

ethnic minorities, they already have low levels of ﬁnancial lit-
eracy. As younger adults, they are more ﬁnancially vulnerable
than their older counterparts. Not only do they have lower levels
of ﬁnancial knowledge, such as inﬂation, compound interest, and
risk diversiﬁcation (Lusardi et al., 2010; Lusardi and Mitchell,
2011a), but they also face more ﬁnancial challenges due to longer
life spans, more ﬁnancial decisions to make, and greater ﬁnancial
risks in an increasingly complex global ﬁnancial environment.

Third, most studies on racial/ethnic minorities have been
conducted in Western societies, particularly the USA, with more
limited research conducted in other contexts, such as Asian
societies.

Fourth, research on ﬁnancial literacy is predominantly quan-
titative (Goyal and Kumar, 2021; Kelley et al., 2021). Qualitative
studies are few, particularly regarding racial/ethnic minorities
(Ekanem, 2013; Gaur et al., 2020). While quantitative studies
provide a broad perspective on the subject matter, qualitative
studies offer an in-depth understanding of how individuals per-
ceive and make meaning of their ﬁnancial decisions. This infor-
mation is valuable for informing ﬁnancial literacy education and
thus improving ﬁnancial decision-making.

This study examined a range of ﬁnancial decisions made by
ethnic minority young adults in Hong Kong using qualitative
inquiry to address these limitations. By adopting a qualitative
approach, the study focuses on generating themes that may not be
captured in quantitative studies relying on statistical ﬁgures. It
extends the literature by providing a deeper understanding of the
ﬁnancial decisions made by younger ethnic minority individuals
within a non-Western context. The ﬁndings also reveal factors
facilitating sound ﬁnancial decision-making among ethnic min-
ority younger people, particularly in Hong Kong. These ﬁndings
have important implications for tailoring “just-in-time” ﬁnancial
literacy education to meet their speciﬁc needs, as opposed to a
“one-size-ﬁts-all” approach (Goyal and Kumar, 2021).

In the following, after brieﬂy highlighting the relevant literature
on ﬁnancial
literacy and ﬁnancial decisions, the ﬁndings on
ethnic minority young adults regarding different areas of ﬁnancial
decision-making will be presented. Factors facilitating their
ﬁnancial decision-making will be identiﬁed, and implications for
ﬁnancial literacy education and further research discussed.

A brief overview of ﬁnancial literacy and ﬁnancial decisions
Patterns of ﬁnancial literacy. Financial literacy levels are asso-
ciated with various socioeconomic factors, including age, gender,
education, parental education, employment status, marital status,
area of residence, and race and ethnicity. Financial
literacy
exhibits a bell curve distribution with age. It is lower among
young and old individuals than those in the middle of the life
cycle (Atkinson and Messy, 2012; Brown and Graf, 2013). For
instance, less than one-third of young adults possess basic con-
cepts about inﬂation, risk diversiﬁcation, and compound interest
(Lusardi et al., 2010; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a). Regarding
gender, women tend to have lower levels of ﬁnancial literacy than
men. They have less ﬁnancial knowledge about debt, inﬂation,
risk diversiﬁcation, and compound interest (Brown and Graf,
2013; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a; Lusardi and Tufano, 2015)
and are less likely to plan for retirement (Herd et al., 2012).
Educational attainment is positively related to ﬁnancial literacy
(Herd et al., 2012; Klapper et al., 2012; Lusardi and Mitchell,
2007, 2011a). Less well-educated people are less likely to answer
ﬁnancial
literacy questions correctly and tend to indicate not
knowing the answer (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a). Individuals
without a college degree are less likely to understand concepts
interest
about

risk diversiﬁcation,

and simple

inﬂation,

2

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

ARTICLE

calculations (Herd et al., 2012). More educated people tend to
have positive attitudes towards retirement planning (van Rooij
et al., 2011a) and possess a bank account (Klapper et al., 2012).
Parental education, particularly mothers’ education, and parents’
possession of stock or retirement accounts are positively related
to ﬁnancial literacy (Lusardi et al., 2010). Fathers’ education is
positively associated with their daughters’ ﬁnancial
literacy
(Mahdavi and Horton, 2014). In terms of employment status,
employed individuals have substantially higher levels of ﬁnancial
literacy than those who are unemployed or retired (Brown and
Graf, 2013; Bucher-Koenen and Lusardi, 2011). Marital status is
also related to ﬁnancial
literacy levels, with married people
tending to have higher levels than single individuals (Brown and
Graf, 2013). In terms of area of residence, those who live in a city
score better in ﬁnancial knowledge than their rural counterparts
(Klapper and Panos, 2011). As for race and ethnicity, individuals
belonging to the racial majority or being native-born have higher
ﬁnancial
literacy levels (Brown and Graf, 2013; Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2007, 2011b). For example, African Americans and
Hispanics in the USA have lower ﬁnancial literacy than Whites
(Al-Bahrani et al., 2019; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007, 2011b). In
Switzerland, foreign citizens, especially immigrants with a non-
German native language, exhibit lower ﬁnancial
literacy than
native-born individuals (Brown and Graf, 2013). Students from
an immigrant background also have lower ﬁnancial literacy than
other students (OECD, 2014).

The association between ﬁnancial
literacy and ﬁnancial
decision-making. Financial literacy is crucial for making sound
ﬁnancial decisions and avoiding costly mistakes. Empirical ﬁnd-
ings show that ﬁnancial literacy is associated with various out-
comes of ﬁnancial decision-making,
including day-to-day
ﬁnancial management, ﬁnancial planning, using ﬁnancial pro-
ducts, debt management, and detecting ﬁnancial scams.

First, ﬁnancial literacy can lead to better day-to-day ﬁnancial
management, such as responsible family budgeting, timely bill
payments, and avoiding impulsive purchases (Akben-Selcuk,
2015; Atkinson and Messy, 2012; Hilgert et al., 2003; Perry and
Morris, 2005). For example, a study of college students shows that
those with higher ﬁnancial literacy are more likely to pay bills on
time and have a budget in place (Akben-Selcuk, 2015). Second,
ﬁnancial
literacy is associated with better ﬁnancial planning.
Financially literate individuals are more likely to engage in savvy
and active saving behavior (Akben-Selcuk, 2015; de Bassa
Scheresberg, 2013; Deuﬂhard et al., 2019; Klapper et al., 2012).
They are more likely to plan for retirement and save for
(de Bassa Scheresberg, 2013). Third, ﬁnancial
emergencies
literacy is related to better debt management. Individuals with
literacy will avoid high-cost borrowing, high
better debt
transaction costs, and higher fees (Lusardi and Tufano, 2015;
de Bassa Scheresberg, 2013). They also adopt better credit card
behavior, which minimizes fees and interest charges resulting
from late payments, cash advances, and paying only the
minimum amount due (Lusardi and Tufano, 2015; Mottola,
2013). Fourth, ﬁnancial literacy inﬂuences the use of ﬁnancial
products. Individuals with higher levels of ﬁnancial literacy are
less likely to be unbanked and use alternative ﬁnancial services,
such as payday loans (Kim and Lee, 2018). It is also associated
with greater participation in investment and savvy investment
decisions. Financially literate people tend to evaluate ﬁnancial
products carefully (Atkinson and Messy, 2012) and be more
involved in the stock market (Almenberg and Dreber, 2015; van
Rooij et al., 2011b). Finally, ﬁnancial literacy can increase the
ability to detect ﬁnancial
fraud. Findings show that a one
standard deviation increase in ﬁnancial knowledge increases the

probability of fraud detection by three percentage points (Engels
et al., 2020).

Financial decisions of racial/ethnic minorities. Research on
ﬁnancial decisions made by racial/ethnic minorities has mostly
focused on using ﬁnancial products, debt management and credit
use, and retirement planning.

Regarding ﬁnancial products, African Americans and Hispa-
nics in the USA are less likely to have a bank account and hold
asset investments, such as stocks, than Whites (Kim et al., 2016;
Lusardi, 2005; Shanbhag, 2022). Another
study examined
community development credit unions providing affordable
ﬁnancial services, such as mortgages, to help African Americans
save money and build assets (Nembhard, 2013). Newly arrived
immigrants in Australia demonstrated low utilization of ﬁnancial
products and services, such as ATM cards, bank savings accounts,
and credit cards (Zuhair et al., 2015).

As for debt, around 80% of Chinese American respondents in a
study on debt ownership held some type of debt, such as credit
cards, mortgages, and instalment loans (Yao et al., 2011). Age, the
presence of children under 18, health, income, and amount of
ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial assets are associated with the
probability of borrowing. Other studies have explored the
attitudes of Black and other minority ethnic entrepreneurs
experiencing bankruptcy in England (Ekanem, 2013) or Paciﬁc
Island adults in New Zealand towards debt, money, or bank-
ruptcy (Gaur et al., 2020). Signiﬁcant racial/ethnic differences in
credit use have also been reported. Approximately 75% of White,
80% of Asian, 50% of Hispanic, and 45% of Black households use
bank credit, in terms of a credit card or a personal loan or line of
credit from a bank. However, nonbank credit, such as payday
loans, is more predominant among Black and Hispanic house-
holds (Goodstein et al., 2021).

Studies on retirement planning show that ethnic minorities
have less savings for retirement than Whites (Gough and Adami,
2013) and are also less motivated to hold retirement savings even
after controlling for different socio-economic characteristics (Kim
et al., 2021).

Ethnic minorities in Hong Kong. Despite growing efforts to
promote ﬁnancial literacy among people in Hong Kong in recent
years, such as establishing the Investor and Financial Education
Council as a public organization to promote ﬁnancial education
in Hong Kong, ethnic minority younger adults are still largely
overlooked. In terms of research, the ﬁnancial literacy of ethnic
minority young adults or even ethnic minority communities is
underexplored. Existing survey ﬁndings only show disparities in
ﬁnancial literacy between younger and older adults in the general
population, with the former performing poorly, particularly in
timely bill payments, making ends meet without borrowing, and
keeping up with their ﬁnancial affairs (Investor Education Centre,
2018). Financial education programs targeting ethnic minorities
the 661 ﬁnancial education
are also limited. Only 0.6% of
initiatives conducted between 2011 and 2015 were intended for
the ethnic minority population (Investor Education Centre,
2015).

Ethnic minorities in Hong Kong refer to the non-Chinese
population, which makes up 8.4% of the total population (Census
and Statistics Department, 2022). Most are Filipino and
Indonesian, constituting 32.5% and 22.9%, respectively, and most
(more than 90%) of these are foreign domestic helpers living in
their employers’ homes. South Asians,
including Pakistanis,
Indians, and Nepalese, make up 16.5% of the ethnic minority
population. The rest are mostly White people and other Asians,
such as Korean and Japanese, who often enjoy a higher social and

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

3

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

economic status in the city and are not the focus of this study.
After excluding the Filipina and Indonesian domestic helpers,
Pakistanis, Indians, Nepalese, and Filipinos represent the largest
proportion of the ethnic minority population in Hong Kong and
are the focus of this study. These individuals may have migrated
to Hong Kong with their families or were born in Hong Kong.
Some of them may have acquired a certain level of English and
Cantonese, the local language, especially if they have received
education in Hong Kong.

In Hong Kong, ethnic minority younger adults are likely to
perform less well in ﬁnancial literacy and ﬁnancial decisions than
the general population, which is largely made up of ethnic
Chinese. This is because they generally fare poorly in terms of
education and employment. For example, school attendance rates
for ethnic minorities in the age groups 3–5, 12–17, and 18–24
years were 90.7%, 96.2%, and 29.2%, respectively, compared to
92.5%, 97.8%, and 51.8% for the whole population in 2016
(Census and Statistics Department, 2017). As regards occupation,
35% of Nepalese, 35% of Pakistani, and 25% of Indian individuals
were engaged in elementary jobs, such as cleaners, laborers, and
food preparation assistants, compared to 21% of the general
population (Census and Statistics Department, 2017).

Drawing on the literature, this study examined the ﬁnancial
decision-making of ethnic minority young adults in Hong Kong
and posed the following research questions:

1. What are the experiences of ethnic minority young adults,
in terms of practice or strategies and perceptions,
in
different areas of ﬁnancial decision-making, including day-
to-day ﬁnancial management
(personal budgeting and
spending), ﬁnancial planning, using ﬁnancial products,
debt management, and detecting ﬁnancial fraud?

2. What factors enable ethnic minority young adults to make

sound ﬁnancial decisions?

Methods
Approach. This study employed a qualitative approach, using
individual in-depth interviews, to examine the ﬁnancial decision-
making of ethnic minority young adults in their daily lives. The
rich data gathered from qualitative inquiry can provide a nuanced
understanding of human behavior, which involves practice and
judgement. Semi-structured interviews allow participants
to
express their thoughts in their own words, which is particularly
beneﬁcial for delving into a poorly understood topic.

Participants and data collection. In this study, Pakistani, Indian,
Nepalese, and Filipino participants were recruited through NGOs
that provided services for ethnic minority young adults and
international ofﬁces of universities using purposive sampling. In
addition to ethnicities, young adults who were 18 to 29 years old,
permanent residents of Hong Kong, and students or employed
were recruited. Table 1 summarizes the participants’ background
characteristics. Fifty-three ethnic minority young adults aged
between 18 and 29 years were recruited: 16 Pakistani, 13 Indian,
13 Nepalese, and 11 Filipino. Thirty-ﬁve were aged 18–23, and 18
were aged 24–29. There were 30 males and 23 females. Thirty-two
were employed at the time of the interview, and 21 were students.
The occupations of those in employment included elementary
jobs (e.g., security guards), service workers (e.g., customer ser-
vice), associate professionals (e.g., program workers in NGOs),
and professionals (e.g., software developers). Many ethnic min-
ority students had part-time jobs (n = 12), such as cashiers,
tutors, football coaches, and delivery workers. Other students
depended on their parents for ﬁnancial support (n = 9). Most
participants were pursuing or had attained at least a bachelor’s

Table 1 Participants’ background characteristics (n = 53).

Characteristics

Frequency

Ethnicity

Pakistani
Indian
Nepalese
Filipino
Age (years)
18–23
24–29

Gender
Male
Female

Work/study status

Student
Employed
Education level

Secondary school
Sub-degree
Bachelor’s degree
Master’s degree

Monthly salary (in US dollars)a
Students (range: $90–$2500)

below $625
$625–$1250
>$1250

Employed (range: US$625–$3560)

below $1250
$1250–$2500
>$2500

aBased on participants reporting this information.

16
13
13
11

35
18

30
23

21
32

12
11
27
3

12
6
2

6
16
8

degree (n = 30). Sub-degree education being pursued or attained
foundation
included associate degrees, higher diplomas, or
diplomas (n = 11). The education level of the remaining partici-
pants ranged from Secondary 3 to 6 (n = 12). Students’ monthly
earnings ranged from US$90 to $2500; more than half received
US$1250 or less (n = 18). Working participants’ monthly earn-
ings ranged from US$625 to $3560, most receiving between US
$1250 and $2500 (n = 16).

The Research Ethics Committee of the university to which the
author was afﬁliated provided ethical approval before the study
commenced. Before interviewing, participants’ informed consent
was obtained after explaining the study’s objectives and principles
of conﬁdentiality and voluntary participation. Each interview
took place in an NGO or university and generally lasted between
60 and 75 min.

Interview questions. The interview questions were developed to
gather information on a range of ﬁnancial decisions based on the
literature on ﬁnancial literacy and ﬁnancial decisions, including day-
to-day ﬁnancial management (personal budgeting and spending),
ﬁnancial planning, using ﬁnancial products, debt management, and
detecting ﬁnancial fraud. Participants were asked about their prac-
tices or strategies and perceptions of each area of ﬁnancial decision-
making. The interviews were conducted in English.

Analysis. The audio recordings of individual
interviews were
transcribed verbatim. Following Braun and Clarke (2006), the-
matic analysis was employed to identify, analyze, and report
major themes within the data. The researchers ﬁrst familiarized
themselves with the data through repeated readings. They then
developed initial codes to capture the meaningful aspects of the

4

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

ARTICLE

Table 2 Major ﬁnancial decision-making themes among ethnic minority young adults.

1. Personal budgeting

Practice and strategies
(cid:129)spending- or saving-centric approach

A

K
◊

Perceptions

B
◊ (cid:129)sense of control and psychological

K

B

A
◊

(cid:129)digital tools, parental monitoring, and
mental bucketing
(cid:129)parental inﬂuence and experiential
learning
(cid:129)modest spending

2. Spending

3. Financial planning

(cid:129)deferred purchase, bargain shopping, and
one-time payment
(cid:129)habit of saving and setting saving goals

4. Use of ﬁnancial products

(cid:129)external restraints and personal tricks
(cid:129)a diverse range of ﬁnancial products

5. Debt management

6. Detecting fraud

(cid:129)parental support, peer mentoring, and
self-education

(cid:129)borrowing money is common: informal
borrowing and government/lending
institution loans
(cid:129)mostly safe credit card usage with some
risks
(cid:129)fraud victimization experiences
(cid:129)understanding the psychology of scams,
language use, and simply ignoring

◊ ◊ ◊ (cid:129)economic and personal challenges

◊ ◊

restraint

◊

◊
◊

◊

◊

◊

◊
◊

◊ (cid:129)differentiating between needs and wants,
seeking the best value, spending as work
incentives, YOLO spending

◊

◊ ◊ (cid:129)grown-up responsibility, safeguard

against ﬁnancial shocks and emotional
wellness

◊

◊

◊ (cid:129)self-discipline and limited funds
◊ (cid:129)favorable: passive income and protection

◊ ◊

◊ ◊

against inﬂation

◊ (cid:129)unfavorable: risky; negative experience

◊ ◊

due to poor understanding and language
barriers

◊ (cid:129)a shame and a strain on social

relationship

◊ (cid:129)convenient but requires caution

◊

◊

◊ (cid:129)high exposure to potential ﬁnancial scams ◊ ◊ ◊
◊

Then themes correspond most closely with the ﬁnancial literacy components: K ﬁnancial knowledge, A ﬁnancial attitudes, B ﬁnancial behavior.

data. These codes were further organized into potential themes,
and the relevant data associated with each code were collated
within the potential themes. The potential themes were reﬁned
through careful review to ensure the coherence of data within
each of them and that they were distinct. Once the reﬁnements
were ﬁnalized, the themes were named to accurately reﬂect their
essence.

Findings
The following ﬁndings present the practices, strategies and per-
ceptions of various ﬁnancial decisions. Table 2 summarizes the
major themes., which also align with particular components of
ﬁnancial literacy, including ﬁnancial knowledge, attitudes, and
behavior (Atkinson and Messy, 2012).

Personal budgeting
Spending- or saving-centric approach in practice. Most partici-
pants had developed habits of monthly budgeting, using saving-
or spending-centric approaches. The former involves setting a
savings amount and then spending the remainder, whereas the
latter involves setting a spending limit and then saving the
remainder. For example, one participant was more conscious of
his savings:

I set in mind that every month I have a certain percentage
to be saved and not to be touched. The rest is like spendable
expenses, so I don’t have to go crazy saving mode.
(18Indian, M/26 y, W, Degree)1

Digital tools, parental monitoring, and mental bucketing as stra-
in practice,
tegies. Participants employed various

strategies

including digital tools, parental monitoring, and mental bucket-
ing. The digital tools they utilized included budgeting apps, Excel
spreadsheets, online banking, and calendar or note taking apps in
their phone. Some examples of budgeting apps to keep track of
budgets were Zoho Expense, Ahorro, Mobills, Money Manager,
Spendee, and Savings Planner.

I have this app Mobills …I just type all my expenses in
where I spent the money so it helps me track if I have
exceeded the monthly limit.
(27Nepalese, M/20 y, S,
Degree)

Some participants relied on online banking, e-statements, or
Excel spreadsheets to keep track of their budgets. One participant
primarily used credit cards for spending: “I check my monthly
statement and like …oh, this month I spent more on food. I
should cut it down a bit.” (18Indian, M, WA, 26 y, Degree)
Another participant updated his budget sheet almost daily, “I
make sure I don’t cross the budget for daily food expenditures, so
I
lunch, and dinner.
(35Filipino, M/28 y, W, S7)

expenditures of breakfast,

separate

Parental monitoring in budgeting was common, where parents
set spending limits or kept the money to prevent their children
from overspending. Participants were positive about parental
monitoring:

I gave all my earnings to my mom and she’ll help save for
me. After deducting the savings, she’ll allocate some for my
spending. (11Pakistani, M/20 y, S, S6)

They won’t let me spend my own money so that they can
keep track of what I do. …I’ll always show my mom what I
bought. …I can say it is ‘control’ …but it’s good to have
monitoring. (1Indian, F/23 y, S, Master’s)

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

5

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

However, some participants simply allocated money into
different categories mentally. One said, “I don’t like keeping
notes. Everything is in my mind.” (47Indian, M/18 y, W, S4),
while another responded, “I just keep them in my mind, divided
by categories.” (40Nepalese, F/21 y, W, SD)

Parental inﬂuence and experiential learning. Participants indicated
that they acquired budgeting ideas through observing their parents
and learning by doing, especially after earning their ﬁrst income.
I’m learning from him [father], like how to save up money,
how to spend it wisely, and how to spend it on only the
important things and not to waste the money. (2Pakistani,
M/22 y, S, SD)

It was around my university years when I was doing a part-
time job and earning some money …my own concept of
saving started to form. (18Indian, M/26 y, W, Degree)

It’s just the willpower of a person. I don’t think there’s too
much difﬁculty for me. (32Indian, M/29 y, W, Degree)

I have a strong mathematical background since I studied
math a lot, so I don’t think numbers are a problem for me.
(17Nepalese, M/18 y, S, Degree)

Spending decisions
Modest spending. Many participants appeared to spend modestly
and consciously. They generally allocated a higher portion of their
budgets to basic needs. As many lived with their parents, they
mostly spent money on food and transportation. Other major
expenses included tuition fees, ﬁnancial support for their families,
rent, and personal entertainment.

I’d say 50% goes toward my food. …Insurance and
everything, I’d say 20%. (38Indian, M/23 y, W, SD)

Perceptions of budgeting. Most participants perceived budgeting
positively, agreeing that it could provide a sense of control against
overspending, as one said, “If you don’t have a budget, it’s really
easy to overspend on stuff and you can’t control your money.”
(47Indian, M/18 y, W, S4). Budgeting was also seen as a form of
psychological restraint, evoking a sense of guilt when budget limits
were exceeded, and fostering discipline for conscious spending:
It makes me feel guilty …kind of a warning …a yellow light
that you’re spending more than you’re supposed to. … It’s
psychological when I see a big number in the amount of
expenses. (29Filipino, F/22 y, S, Degree)
However, many expressed the difﬁculty of maintaining a
budgeting habit due to economic and personal challenges. Limited
funds and high living costs posed economic challenges as there was
not a lot of money to go around, as expressed by one participant, “I
don’t really have a lot of money. …I don’t know how I can track it.”
(4Indian, M/21 y, S, Degree) Another said, “It’s very difﬁcult because
nowadays all the things are pricey, but you just have a limited
amount of money.” (28Filipino, F/19 y, S, S6)
relate to feelings

that budgeting is
demanding, requires much self-discipline, and causes stress.
Some participants found it demanding as it was time-consuming
and involved excessive work.

Personal challenges

It sounds, you know, ridiculous to me …somewhat a waste
of time. There’s a lot of data. (15Pakistani, F/25 y, S,
Degree)

It’s tedious and it takes time to write down all the details. …
The effort needed to keep track of things demotivates me.
(34Indian, M/30 y, W, Degree)
Others found it difﬁcult because they struggled with self-control.
One said, “I want to buy many things like this and that. …It’s hard
for me as I could not control myself.” (42Nepalese, F/25 y, W, SD)
Others were reluctant to budget because it induced too much stress:

I think budgeting gives me a lot of stress. I just want to
focus on making money, so I don’t have to worry about it.
(31Filipino, M/22 y, S, Degree)

Constantly checking is kind of torturing me. …If I check it
too much, I’ll get sad about my expenditure. (18Indian, M/
26 y, W, Degree)

Half of my money goes to food and transportation, and the
other half
that.
(2Pakistani, M/22 y, S, SD)

I’m saving for

fees and all

school

Deferred purchase, bargain shopping, and one-time payment as
strategies. Strategies in spending decisions included deferred
purchases, bargain shopping, and one-time payments. One
strategy employed was to re-evaluate spending decisions by
deferring purchases:

When I shop, I double-think. … I’ll buy it a day or two later
…to think about if I truly need it or not. (22Pakistani, F/
25 y, W, S6)

Another common strategy was bargain shopping. Participants
described how they bargain-hunted or waited for sales to get the
best value for money.

If I go to buy a pair of shoes, then I like to go through the
whole mall and see, you know, which one is really worth the
money. (4Indian, M/21 y, S, Degree)

I’ll try my best to use as little money as I can. …I’ll check
where I can get it the cheapest. (51Pakistani, M/25 y, W,
Degree)

When making purchases, most preferred a one-time lump sum
payment to avoid interest charges. One participant talked about
the extra charges:

I used to buy in instalments with credit cards and I spent a
lot, and I couldn’t pay some of the bills….Now I pay in
lump sum, I ﬁnd this very clear to your mind. …Nobody is
calling you to pay for the minimum. (43Nepalese, M/28 y,
W, Degree)

However, some paid in instalments,

incurring interest on
expensive products or when the budget was tight. Generally, an
item costing more than HK$1000 (approximately US$125) was
considered expensive.

If it’s around HK$500–$1000 (US$63–$125), I’ll spend a
lump sum. But if it’s HK$5000 or HK$6,000 (US$625 or
$750) like that, I’ll usually spend it on instalment. …When
making it 12 months,
I only need to pay HK$500.
(51Pakistani, M/25 y, W, Degree)

Nevertheless, a smaller proportion of participants who showed
qualities such as determination and mathematical competence
did not ﬁnd budgeting as hard.

Spending philosophies. Participants shared their perceptions about
spending, revealing various spending philosophies such as dif-
ferentiating between needs and wants, viewing spending as a

6

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

ARTICLE

work incentive, and embracing YOLO (You Only Live Once)
spending. Conscious spenders distinguished between must-haves
and nice-to-haves, ensuring they spent on what was necessary
rather than what was desired.

When you buy something …you have to ask yourself
whether you need it or want it, like you just think it’s cute.
(25Pakistani, F/19 y, S, Master’s)

in bank accounts, they used external assistance or restraints as
strategies by having their parents or boyfriend save it for them:
My parents don’t want me to be spoiled with so much
money. We often see that people who start earning money
do some bad stuff, like getting into drugs, gaming, or going
out with friends a lot. …I’m not doing all these. …But still,
they keep my money. (49Filipino, M/19 y, W, S6)

I often question whether I really need it …especially when
it comes to luxury items like clothes and shoes. But for
food,
I do not
for health,
compromise. (17Nepalese, M/18 y, S, Degree)

I do not compromise;

I’ll give half of it [salary] to my boyfriend so I won’t be able
to touch it. The remaining is for my spending. …He has a
better concept of saving than me …and he helps me save.
(16Indian, F/27 y, W, Degree)

Some participants showed that spending was a motivation to
work hard, as one said: “I base how much I work on my expenses.
If I have many expenses coming up, I’ll try to work more.”
(3Indian, M/21 y, S, Degree). Others embraced YOLO spending
as a means of seeking happiness:

I didn’t want to decide how I was going to spend it. …You
should never restrict yourself. Of course, you have savings.
But for your spending, you should just go with whatever
makes you happier. (18Indian, M/26 y, W, Degree)

You only live once! … It’s good to spend a little bit on
something expensive. …With the money I earned …I
deserve at least some to use on myself. (32Indian, M/29 y,
W, Degree)

Financial planning
Savings habits and setting savings goals. Many participants
established a habit of saving. More than half said they allocated at
least 30% of their monthly salary or pocket money to savings.
Some started to save in childhood, but many did so after their
ﬁrst employment while their earnings served as resources for
hands-on learning. One participant said, “When I started to earn
my own money, I didn’t want to spend all of it. I want to save and
learn about investments.” (29Filipino, F/22 y, S, Degree)

Depending on their life stage, those who saved set various
saving goals. In addition to saving for education, some saved to
buy property, start a family, build a business in their home
country, or for retirement. Some described the goals:

I’ve always wanted to start a piggery business. …In the
Philippines, …a full roasted pig we call it Lechon. It’s in
every celebration. …There’s a market for that. …I want to
start one because my uncle, sisters, and brothers are good at
that. (29Filipino, F/22 y, S, Degree)

For the very long term, like for retirement, I’m setting aside
20% of my salary to invest in stocks and bonds. (34Indian,
M/30 y, W, Degree)
Gaining ﬁnancial autonomy was also mentioned as a goal, as

recounted by one participant:

I’m never going to focus too much on my future husband.
I’m not going to be ﬁnancially dependent on another
person. …I always thought …I’d get educated and then
earn money. I’d not be together [with someone] and be
scared of splitting just because of money. (10Nepalese, F/
21 y, S, Degree)

External restraints and personal tricks as strategies. Participants
employed various savings strategies. In addition to saving money

Participants reported using various personal hacks, such as

opening separate bank accounts for speciﬁed uses:

I have two different bank accounts. One is strictly for saving
money. …The other one is for paying bills and spending on
things like necessities. (35Filipino, M/28 y, W, S7)

When I started my job, I only had a Hang Seng bank
account. Then I speciﬁcally opened an HSBC account to
keep my education savings there. …If you see a large
amount of money, it makes you less intelligent about your
expenditure because it projects an illusion that you have a
lot of money. (48Indian, M/24 y, W, Degree)

Another example was a four-wallet strategy to divide money

into smaller portions for designated purposes:

One wallet is for saving money. …If I buy something and I
get some money left, I put it in the second wallet. The third
wallet is for putting money that I couldn’t touch,
like
paying for my violin lessons and the dentist. …The fourth
wallet is for transportation. (30Filipino, F/21 y, W, SD)

Another strategy was simply stashing cash away under the

mattress or in other hidden places to reduce its accessibility:

I have like HK$10,000 (US$1250) under my mattress. Every
month I have HK$1000 (US$12.5) …a hundred of $10 s …
put inside my mattress, and I would sleep on it. My goal is
…to the point if I can’t sleep properly, I have enough
money. …Some people have their piggy bank I have my
mattress. (31Filipino, M/22 y, S, Degree)

Sometimes I took all the money out and put it in a more
hidden place like I can literally forget about it. (28Filipino,
F/19 y, S, S6)

Perceptions of ﬁnancial planning. Most participants agreed that
ﬁnancial planning and saving were important. Some thought of it
as a grown-up responsibility. As adults, they were responsible for
making ﬁnancial plans and avoiding irresponsible purchases:
I already feel ashamed that I’ve been asking for pocket
money from my parents. …I think it’s because we’re Asian,
…we depend a lot on our parents. I don’t really want to live
like that. …I want to be able to stand up on my feet.
(10Nepalese, F/21 y, S, Degree)

I feel like after turning 18, …it’s important to budget your
money, save it, invest it, and not make stupid and foolish
purchases. (19Indian, M/19 y, S, Degree)
Financial planning was seen as a safeguard against ﬁnancial
shocks, offering a sense of emotional wellness or peace of mind as
they knew they had backup resources. This was particularly

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

7

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

important after they experienced the COVID-19 pandemic and
became motivated to be well-prepared:

It taught me that no job is stable …even pilots get laid off.
…Your income is not always there. You always have to be
prepared for it. (41Nepalese, M/22 y, W, Degree)

Parental support, peer mentoring, and self-education as strategies.
Participants employed various means of obtaining information
and experiencing ﬁnancial products, including parental support,
peer assistance, and self-education with online resources. Some
parents were supportive by providing funds for hands-on learning
in stock investment or opportunities for joint investment:

You can have a ﬁre break out in your house, you can have
your stuff get stolen, you can get hit by cancer, and even
this pandemic. So ﬁnancial planning is extremely impor-
tant. (21Pakistani, F/23 y, W, Degree)

My dad gave me a small amount of money just to learn. …
Because the only way you can learn is you do it yourself. …
He helped me set up my account and everything and then I
started. (19Indian, M/19 y, S, Degree)

It’s like a comfort …in case anything goes wrong in your
life. It’s always good to have a backup plan …and you
always have something to protect you. (35Filipino, M/
28 y, W, S7)
Nevertheless, not all participants were positive about ﬁnancial

planning; some valued income generation over saving money:
Saving isn’t super important to me because I feel I should
be earning more than I should be able to save. …If I am
saving.
earning more,
(31Filipino, M/22 y, S, Degree)

I don’t have to worry about

Some also felt

they were not good at saving because of
inadequate self-discipline and limited money: “The reality …is
that my income is really not a lot at all. And I recognize there’s a
limit on how much I can stretch, even if I really want to stretch
it.” (36Filipino, M/26 y, W, Degree)

The use of ﬁnancial products
A diverse range of ﬁnancial products. Participants reported using
various ﬁnancial products or investments. Insurance was most
frequently mentioned, followed by stocks, and other choices,
including cryptocurrency, index funds, and forex trading. Buying
property or gold in their home country as conventional invest-
ments was popular, as the older generations have done.

Different types of insurance, including life, medical, accident,
illness, were purchased and considered safe and

and critical
ﬂexible:

My insurance is three years old. …If something bad
happens, I can use it. If I don’t use it after 20 years, it’s my
money, so it’s like a saving. (43Nepalese, M/28 y, W,
Degree)

All of them are index funds because the management cost is
low and it’s simple to set up. It’s set and forget, no need to
actively manage. (34Indian, M/30 y, W, Degree)

Buying property or gold in the home country was popular. Like
they made or were planning to make these
their parents,
investments as they believed their value would steadily increase:

Dad bought properties in Pakistan and the values increase
every year as it’s on the main side of the road. …The more
convenient the properties, the higher the price it is. …Three
are under my name, others under my siblings’ name.
(22Pakistani, F/25 y, W, S6)

Buying property is safer compared to stocks. …Buying it
overseas is a lot safer …because the property in Hong Kong
is a lot more expensive. (31Filipino, M/22 y, S, Degree)

I can use this gold in my wedding … it’s kind of holding
money because I don’t think the gold price will drop. It’s a
good investment. (53Nepalese, F/25 y, W, Degree)

I invested with the help of my mom. …She invested and got
a return and she gave me the interests. (10Nepalese, F/21 y,
S, Degree)
Assistance from ﬁnancially savvy friends was also a way to
in stocks,

their knowledge and gain experience

enhance
insurance, or setting up a business:

I have a group of friends and we all invest in stocks. We like
to give each other tips like, “I’m going to invest in this …
maybe you should take a look at this.” Or sometimes before
they invest,
this
company?” And then I do my research …like we help each
other. (19Indian, M/19 y, S, Degree)

they ask “What do you think about

My friends are in Pakistan …their family has been investing
in property and stocks. …They bought their own shisha
lounge recently. …I discussed with them: What was the
cost? How much should I save for starting up this kind of
stuff? (22Pakistani, F/25 y, W, S6)

Another strategy was self-education, by reading news, studying
company information, and surﬁng the internet and YouTube for
tutorials and knowledge:

I see the performance of their company around 5 or 10
years. Then I see the future analysis …how the company
will perform in the future. (13Pakistani, M/23 y, W, Degree)

There are a lot of tutorials online or on YouTube. … There
are also a lot of good pages that talk about investing. … It’s
easily obtainable. (10Nepalese, F/21 y, S, Degree)

Perceptions of using ﬁnancial products. Participants expressed dif-
ferent views about using ﬁnancial products. The favorable view held
that ﬁnancial products acted as a passive form of income and could
help protect against inﬂation, as one participant expressed, “It’s good
to buy stocks because it’s like passive income. You can do your job
when it also generates income.” (43Nepalese, M/28 y, W, Degree)
they thought
some viewed it unfavorably as
investment carried substantial risk. In particular, stock invest-
ment was akin to gambling, which involved taking chances and
the possibility of losing hard-earned money:

However,

You are literally gambling …the price of shares would rise
or fall suddenly. …Just in days, you could lose so much.
That’s why my aim is to look for a professional job so that I
don’t have to depend on unexpected business. (17Nepalese,
M/18 y, S, Degree)

Some others held unfavorable views due to their own or their
families’ and friends’ negative experiences resulting from poor
understanding of ﬁnancial products:

I bought stock and I sold it. …If I had kept it a bit longer, I
could have gotten a much higher return. …I just sold it

8

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

ARTICLE

based on rumors that the stock won’t go up. (27Nepalese,
M/20 y, S, Degree)

My uncle didn’t know how to play it. He just went to the
bank and was told to invest this and that without any
explanation. …In the end, he lost a lot of money.
(26Nepalese, F/21 y, S, Degree)
Sometimes, the lack of understanding of ﬁnancial products
could result from language barriers. One participant referred to
the Mandatory Provident Fund (MPF), a compulsory pension
fund in Hong Kong, as an example:

If you go to work, your employer won’t tell you what’s this
or that. They just give you the MPF paper. …People don’t
know what’s written there. They just sign it. Which product
is better? They don’t know. (2Pakistani, M/22 y, S, SD)

Debt management
Borrowing money as a common practice. It was quite common for
participants to take out loans from different sources, including
family, friends, the government, and ﬁnancial institutions. Some
borrowed money from their parents or siblings. Due to close
family ties and strong support, paying back the loan was not
always expected. Some would also borrow from friends despite
feeling uneasy about it:

I had zero income and my wife is jobless. …I felt it was a
shame to borrow from my parents. …I asked my brother
who is in Qatar. …It’s like a brother thing. He just sent it to
me and …no need to return it. (14Pakistani, M/28 y, W,
Degree)

To be broke on the 25th of the month but your salary only
comes on the 31st. …Those few days you have to live …so I
have to borrow from my friend. (38Indian, M/23 y, W, SD)

Some participants who were or had been students took out

government student loans for educational expenses:

Hong Kong is so expensive, and so are school fees. I can’t
pay it all at once so I had to borrow from the government.
(23Filipino, F/23 y, W, Degree)

Some participants borrowed money from banks to buy an
apartment. Others borrowed from lending institutions charging high
interest rates to pay for tuition fees, buy iPads, or pay off credit card
debts. They described their own or their friends’ experiences:

I have a period of time without a job. I have to pay with a
credit card every month. I’ve skipped one month …and
they started to call me and I was irritated. …Then I realized
…why I wouldn’t start to do research tracking the annual
rate, and at last, I decided to go to this loan company.
(26Nepalese, F/21 y, S, Degree)

My friend found it hard to pay back because the interest
rate was high. …She graduated last year and she has only
worked for a few months. …She has to pay for the loan and
to pay for her credit cards. (22Pakistani, F/25 y, W, S6)

Mostly safe credit card usage with some risks. Approximately one-
third of participants owned a credit card. Occasionally, some used
their parents’, siblings’, or friends’ credit cards, with approval, when
they could not get their own, as illustrated by one participant:

My friend doesn’t use her credit card much. …I just took
hers, bought things, and on the same spot transferred
money to her account. (22Pakistani, F/25 y, W, S6)

Most credit card users could settle their bills on time, like one
who said, “Unlike others who may pay it last minute. I pay it
immediately after receiving the statements.” (48Indian, M/24 y,
W, Degree)

However, some participants only paid the minimum due on
credit cards, especially due to ignorance about interest charges.
One did not know the consequences of doing so:

I was studying for an associate degree and I wanted to get as
high marks as possible. I thought that if I got into the
university then I could pay for them all afterwards, so
there’s no pressure if I give minimum payment every
month. …I didn’t realize about the interest. I swiped a lot.
(26Nepalese, F/21 y, S, Degree)

Perceptions of debt management. Participants considered bor-
rowing money was shameful and could hurt their social rela-
tionships. Borrowing money was associated with shame and guilt,
especially for people capable of working, instead of borrowing
money from others:

We have everything to earn money. … We’re healthy. We
have all the physical and mental ability to work. …So we
don’t have to depend on other people. (5Indian, M/22 y, S,
Degree)

The shame is that …if God has given me a healthy body
and I have my hands ﬁne, if I can walk, if I can work, then
why go ask someone for anything? (14Pakistani, M/28 y, W,
Degree)

Others thought that borrowing money could create tensions

with friends or relatives, especially if money was not returned:
Some friends of mine have taken money from me …but
they don’t return it. … They’ll say, “I still don’t have
money.” …What the bank does is good …charge the
interest from them. (52Indian, F/29 y, W, Master’s)

You lend money to relatives or friends …but they might
not return it to you. They might not pick up your phones.
They might go away from the city. …That’s what I’ve
heard….I don’t think they call the police …at the end they
are family. (17Nepalese, M/18 y, S, Degree)

Participants considered credit cards to be convenient, and
they enjoyed the reward systems. One said, “It’s like an
Octopus card2 but is more widely used, especially for online
shopping. And it’s convenient …you can accumulate points for
more savings.” (35Filipino, M/28 y, W, S7) However, many
were also aware that credit card use could lead to uncontrol-
lable spending because they could easily overlook how much
they had spent:

If I had one, I would go non-stop shopping because I have
pressure at work. Who wouldn’t go shopping after work?
(38Indian, M/23 y, W, SD)

When you take out your money, you know your limit. Like
if your wallet has $5,000 and you’re using it, you’ll notice
how much money you’ve left. But credit cards …you’ll keep
using it. (8Pakistani, M/23 y, W, SD)

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

9

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

Detecting fraud
Fraud victimization experiences. Participants were vulnerable to
fraud; some shared stories about falling or almost falling for scams
or had heard about friends being scammed, relating to possible
charity scams, unnecessary lab tests, online gaming,
investment
fraud, and money lent but not returned. One participant believed he
had been scammed when he was asked for a donation on the street:
I’ve been scammed once on the street by a man who’s
requesting money for their own institution from their own
country. It involves children who are sick. …Because I was
young and naive, I didn’t ask them for validation. Although
he wanted to scam more money at the time, I didn’t carry
too much. (35Filipino, M/28 y, W, S7)

There were unnecessary medical lab tests:

They said they got funding from the government. They did
10 different cancer tests on me for $4000. My mom was
very angry about why I did it. She said it’s a scam because
I’m so young. I won’t have any cancer right now. (1Indian,
F/23 y, S, Master’s)
Money was lost due to an online scam:
There was once an email …saying if you put $10,000 on
this account, we’ll give you $20,000 …that kind of scam …
but I didn’t do it. …The second time when I bought a
computer game online, they just asked me to send some
money in advance. …They totally scammed me and then
blocked me. (44Nepalese, M/20 y, W, S6)

Friends had also experienced investment fraud:
I have a friend who invested in …some sort of software
soccer game. …He saw an advertisement online in a
newspaper. He invested and then the money was just gone.
…He lost HK$5000. (6Pakistani, M/25 y, W, S6)

They called and encouraged my friend to put in money and
said, “…This is very good. You can earn a lot. You can be a
rich person. You can do whatever you want to do.” She put
a little bit to see. After six months, they kept calling and
saying she was doing well, she could do better. And they got
everything on that scam and they never called back.
(43Nepalese, M/28 y, W, Degree)

Strategies and perceptions
for detecting fraud. Participants
reported that the ﬂood of suspicious calls and messages they
received, and uncertainty about whether they were genuine or
not, exposed them to potential scams.

I don’t know if it’s a scam. …I got calls for buying currencies
from them. They told me the whole plan, and I’d even go
into a discussion and I was close to paying them. I’ve been
near that. (49Filipino, M/19 y, W, S6)

Once I borrowed money and after that many ﬁnancial
companies have my number. …They ask what my name is
and ask for my information. …I didn’t give them because I
know they might want to get my bank information … it’s
not safe. (8Pakistani, M/23 y, W, SD)

They also talked about how to avoid scams by understanding
their psychology as emotional manipulation to induce feelings of
guilt:

They try to confuse you with a lot of situations to guilt trip
you. They make you feel bad about other people. They try
to trick you into thinking that your life is a lot better than

theirs. …They can make you feel good about giving money.
… They’re mentally threatening you not in a bad way. …If
you have a strong personality, you can ﬁght back easily. But
if you’re naive, it can be quite difﬁcult. (35Filipino, M/
28 y, W, S7)

Participants reported pretending they did not understand
Cantonese (the local spoken language in Hong Kong) or simply
ignoring dubious calls or messages as tactics to tackle potential
scams:

I think it’s funny because I can speak okay Cantonese.
Whenever I get calls from banks or something, I always ask,
“Can you speak in English?” and then they just disconnect.
(22Pakistani, F/25 y, W, S6)

Some unknown WhatsApp messages are frequent. But I’d
ignore them as I know they are dangerous. (30Filipino, F/
21 y, W, SD)

Discussion
This study has various implications. It contributes to conceptual
or theoretical understanding, provides insights into practical
strategies, and offers directions for further research.

Knowledge or theoretical contributions
Financial decision-making experiences. This study has contributed
knowledge to addressing the research gap by revealing the
ﬁnancial decision-making experiences of younger ethnic mino-
rities in a non-Western context. We examined their behaviors,
strategies, and perceptions across a range of ﬁnancial decisions,
including personal budgeting, spending, ﬁnancial planning, the
use of ﬁnancial products, debt management, and detecting fraud.
Many ethnic minority young adults practiced budgeting, using
digital tools, parental monitoring, and mental bucketing. They
learned about budgeting by observing their parents and gaining
hands-on experience with their own earnings. Budgeting was
challenging due to limited funds, high living expenses, time
issues. Most were modest
demands, stress, and self-control
spenders, prioritizing basic needs like food and transportation
and employing strategies like deferred purchases, bargain shop-
ping, and lump-sum payments. Some opted for instalment pay-
ments for expensive items, and when their budget was tight.
When spending, they differentiated between needs and wants,
sought value for money, worked to meet their spending needs,
and purchased for happiness. Saving at least one-third of their
monthly income, they utilized external assistance and personal
tricks. Their long-term saving goals encompassed education,
family, business, retirement, and female autonomy.
housing,
Financial planning was perceived as an adult responsibility, a
safeguard against emergencies, and ensuring peace of mind. They
invested in insurance, stocks, cryptocurrency, index funds, forex
trading, property, and gold. Parental support, peer mentoring,
and self-learning inﬂuenced their investment decisions. Lack of
knowledge and language barriers may contribute to negative
perceptions or experiences of ﬁnancial products. Informal bor-
rowing from family and friends was commonplace, while others
resorted to government or lending institution loans. Around one-
third owned a credit card. Most used them safely, but risks exist
when using someone else’s card, or they are ignorant about
interest charges. They were aware of ﬁnancial scams and
employed preventive strategies like understanding the psychology
of scams and ignoring scammers, although they occasionally fell
victim to fraud.

10

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

ARTICLE

Enabling factors to ﬁnancial decision-making. Factors affecting
ﬁnancial literacy are widely understood in the literature, but less
has been examined regarding the factors affecting ﬁnancial
decision-making. Based on the ﬁnancial decision-making
experiences, we further identiﬁed various factors or conditions
that facilitated ethnic minority young adults’ ﬁnancial decision-
making and enabled them to make better ﬁnancial decisions.
While some other factors acted as barriers, awareness of these
barriers and taking action to address them can transform them
into enabling factors. The enabling factors include family social
capital,
intrapersonal characteristics, social dynamics factors,
command of knowledge, and facilitative contextual circum-
stances. These insights can help devise ﬁnancial literacy education
for ethnic minority young adults.

In the study,

intergenerational

Family social capital. Family social capital enables families to
leverage both material and symbolic resources to beneﬁt their
members (Furstenberg and Kaplan, 2004). In this study family
social capital played a crucial role in participants’ ﬁnancial
decision-making, as shown by the resources and support derived
from the family relationships,
including the passing down of
money-related attitudes, norms, and behavior from one genera-
tion to another and between siblings. Both intergenerational
support and sibling support are key components of this family
social capital.
support was
demonstrated through parental role modeling and involvement.
While participants did not mention direct teaching of ﬁnancial
education by parents, parents served as role models from whom
their children observed and learned ﬁnancial attitudes and
behaviors. This was how participants acquired their ideas of
budgeting. Parents also actively coached ﬁnancial decision-
making by monitoring budgeting, setting spending limits, super-
vising saving, providing funds to help set up stock accounts,
offering joint investment opportunities, and providing ﬁnancial
assistance. Sibling support refers to the emotional and practical
support provided by siblings. Study participants sought help from
their siblings or provided ﬁnancial assistance to one another
during ﬁnancial difﬁculties, as shown by their lending money to
each other to avoid unnecessary interest charges that may arise
from resorting to other sources. Strong family social capital can
be attributed to cultural values emphasizing family relationships,
ﬁlial piety, and respect for parents.

Intrapersonal

Intrapersonal

characteristics.

characteristics,
which comprise personal attributes and life perspectives, are
evident in facilitating ethnic minority young adults’ ﬁnancial
decision-making. Personal attributes such as self-motivation, self-
discipline, and other competencies play a role. Self-motivation is
an inner force that compels behavior (Waitley, 2010) and gives
people energy to initiate actions and persist in efforts to attain a
goal
(Robbins and Judge, 2022). This study revealed self-
motivation to be important in ﬁnancial decision-making, such
as budgeting, as it is difﬁcult for those with lower motivation to
sustain a budgeting habit when they consider budgeting as
demanding,
time consuming, and excessive in work. Self-
discipline involves being able to control one’s impulses and
long-term goals (American Psychological
desires in favor of
Association, 2023). Participants expressed the importance of self-
discipline in successful budgeting, saving, and spending. Math
competencies ease ﬁnancial decisions. Those with numeracy skills
tend to feel it easy to engage in budgeting.

Life perspectives are about people’s overall views of life, which
include personal philosophies and future orientation and facilitate
ethnic minority young adults’ ﬁnancial decisions. Personal
philosophies, which are values and attitudes that can be shaped
by personal experiences and family and cultural inﬂuences, guide
people’s decisions. Spending philosophies can be part of an
expression of personal philosophies. Study participants exhibited

various personal philosophies, such as simplicity-based, enjoy-
ment-based, and work-to-spend philosophies, reﬂected in their
Simplicity-based living philosophy
spending philosophies.
emphasizes a minimalist lifestyle over material possessions, as
evident
in the differentiation between needs and wants in
spending philosophy. Enjoyment-based living philosophy values
pleasures and living in the present moment, as reﬂected in the
YOLO style of spending philosophy. A work-to-spend philosophy
underscores the importance of working hard to support desired
spending levels and is shown by the work-as-incentive spending
philosophy.

Future orientation is the ability to anticipate future events, give
them personal meaning, and operate with them mentally (Nurmi,
1991). It is associated with future-oriented behaviors, such as
planning and delayed gratiﬁcation (Strathman et al., 1994). This
study suggests that individuals with saving goals tend to have a
stronger future orientation as they plan for long-term objectives
such as education, starting a family, property investments, and
retirement. Those who practice delayed gratiﬁcation by deferring
purchases also show future-oriented tendencies.

Social dynamics factors. Social dynamics factors include peer
support and vigilance within ethnic communities. Peer support
involves ethnic minority young adults helping each other to make
ﬁnancial decisions through monitoring, mentoring, and collabor-
ating to keep track of each other’s ﬁnancial behaviors towards
goals, offer practical advice in planning decisions, and share tips
and efforts in decision-making, respectively. For example, peer
monitoring serves as a social restraint to help those who struggle
with saving. Peer advice is sought concerning investments in their
home countries. Collaboration facilitates joint decision-making
on buying stocks. Peers, along with parents, also serve as ﬁnancial
socialization agents.

Vigilance in ethnic minority communities is needed to prevent
exploitation, as trust is often presumed within these communities.
In the study, trust was demonstrated in the common practice of
informal borrowing. Although informal loans can be enforced by
social or community ties, they are not without risk. Without legal
loan agreements, the possibility of bad debts or scams can arise,
and did occur within participants’ communities.

Knowledge proﬁciency. Knowledge proﬁciency refers to the
command of knowledge essential for making informed ﬁnancial
decisions. There are two types of knowledge. The ﬁrst applies to a
range of ﬁnancial concepts required to navigate choices in
everyday ﬁnancial situations, such as knowledge of effective
saving strategies, information on different ﬁnancial products, and
loans, and minimum
interest charges for instalment plans,
payments on credit cards. It is important, as the study revealed
possible risks and negative experiences among participants
stemming from a lack of caution or knowledge, like stashing
cash away and ignorance of high interest rates when repaying
minimum amounts on credit card debts or loans from lending
companies. This type of knowledge is also important considering
the potential issue of misinformation. Many participants were
interested in using ﬁnancial products such as insurance policies
and stocks in Hong Kong and property investment in their home
countries. However, their reliance on self-learning through online
resources, such as YouTube’s KOL, or listening to peers exposed
them to the risks of misinformation. For instance, one participant
regretted making a poor decision to sell stocks based on hearsay,
lacking proper knowledge of how stocks work.

some fell victim to various

The second type of knowledge involves protection against
fraud. While participants tried to avoid suspicious messages and
calls,
scams, accentuating the
importance of being equipped with proactive measures, as the
ones used, simply ignoring them, appear passive. Familiarizing
oneself with common forms of fraud, exercising caution with

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

11

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

offers that seem too good to be true, accessing scam alert
information, knowing how to report scams, and understanding
one’s legal rights when encountering scams would be good anti-
fraud measures to learn.

contextual

Facilitative

circumstances. Various

contextual
circumstances, including leverage of real-life lessons, access to
technology, and language accessibility, can be inﬂuential in ethnic
minority young adults’ ﬁnancial decisions. This study shows that
the employment and pandemic experiences have been translated
into real-life lessons to acquire ﬁnancial knowledge and attitudes.
The ﬁrst earnings from employment nurtured the ideas of
budgeting and ﬁnancial planning, and provided opportunities for
acquiring relevant skills. This suggests that promoting ﬁnancial
planning strategies and saving habits earlier, at
least before
starting employment, is beneﬁcial. Individuals can avoid making
unnecessary mistakes and enter smoothly the world of work that
requires many ﬁnancial decisions. Due to the pandemic, some
participants experienced a positive change in their ﬁnancial
attitudes. They realized the importance of preparing for economic
uncertainty and were eager to improve their ﬁnancial planning.
Technology not only provides easy access to online ﬁnancial
materials, but can also facilitate ﬁnancial decision-making using
digital tools, which are particularly useful for following budgeting
and tracking expenses. As many participants considered budget-
ing to be arduous,
it can be made easier by adopting
technological aids.

Finally,

language accessibility can affect the acquisition of
ﬁnancial literacy. Participants’ negative experiences with ﬁnancial
products, such as bank products or MPF, for instance, largely
stemmed from a lack of understanding that can also be
compounded by a language barrier.

Enriched understanding of ﬁnancial socialization. Family social
capital as an enabling factor of ﬁnancial decisions aligns with the
theory of ﬁnancial socialization, referring to the process of
developing values, attitudes, standards, norms, knowledge, and
behaviors promoting ﬁnancial viability and individual well-being
(Danes, 1994). Research shows that parents are important
socialization agents inﬂuencing ﬁnancial attitudes, such as credit
attitudes (Norvilitis et al., 2006). Despite arguments suggesting
that parental importance declines as children get older (Danes,
1994) and peers take on greater inﬂuence (John, 1999), this study
shows that ethnic minority young adults continue to rely heavily
on their parents for ﬁnancial guidance. The ﬁndings of this study
extend the understanding of ﬁnancial socialization processes by
recognizing the persistent and exceptionally inﬂuential roles of
ethnic minority parents. Other research also supports that ethnic
minority young adults seek parental advice on important edu-
cation and employment decisions (Chan et al., 2020).

Practical implications. The ﬁndings on enabling factors and
various behaviors shed light on practical suggestions for enhan-
cing ﬁnancial literacy education, which, in turn, improves the
ﬁnancial decision-making of ethnic minority young adults.

Second, to promote holistic ﬁnancial

First, in relation to family social capital, if parental inﬂuence
remains strong in young adulthood,
it may be strategically
beneﬁcial to involve ethnic minority parents, either as target
participants or partners, in tailored ﬁnancial literacy education.
literacy education for
ethnic minority young adults, it is necessary to address their
speciﬁc personal attributes and life perspectives as attitude
components, in addition to increasing general ﬁnancial knowl-
edge and skills. Self-discipline, self-motivation, spending philo-
sophies, and future orientation could be positively fostered by

taking into account the unique challenges they face in ﬁnancial
literacy education.

Third, in response to social dynamic factors, while ensuring the
accuracy of shared ﬁnancial information, peer inﬂuence can be
capitalized on for effective ﬁnancial literacy education by utilizing
collaboration as a learning approach and developing peer
learning experiences. Also,
mentoring to optimize mutual
addressing vigilance in community trust and the potential risks
associated with informal
topics to be
included in ﬁnancial literacy education.

loans are important

Fourth, concerning knowledge proﬁciency, ﬁnancial

literacy
education should incorporate the two essential types of knowl-
edge required for making ﬁnancial decisions. This includes
knowledge about everyday ﬁnancial situations—such as the use of
various ﬁnancial products, the consequences of different credit
card payment options, and the interest
rate information
associated with formal debts—as well as knowledge about
proactive anti-fraud strategies.

Fifth, in response to facilitative contextual circumstances, the
current post-pandemic period is an opportune time to offer
ethnic minority young adults ﬁnancial
literacy education to
capitalize on their increased motivation to learn and improve
their ﬁnancial decisions. Also, as smartphone use is indispensable
among young people, including ethnic minorities, user-friendly
budgeting apps that ﬁt well their ﬁnancial situations can help
make budgeting efﬁcient, stress-free, and engaging. Moreover, it
is important to provide ﬁnancial literacy education that takes into
consideration language needs to ensure a thorough grasp of
ﬁnancial concepts. For instance, interpretation support can ease
language barriers. However, in the long run, policy interventions
in the educational system, such as remedial language support and
learning Chinese at a young age, are necessary.

Last, various ﬁnancial behaviors prone to mental accounting
bias should be addressed in ﬁnancial literacy education to equip
ethnic minority young adults with the skills to make optimal
decisions. Mental accounting refers to the cognitive operations to
organize, create mental
labels, and keep track of money or
ﬁnancial activities (Thaler, 1985). An important concept in this
theory is that money is fungible or interchangeable, regardless of
its source or purpose. However, people often violate this principle
and see money differently, resulting in suboptimal decisions. For
instance, some participants might treat credit cards as different
mental accounts. They were willing to spend more on credit cards
compared to cash, as there seems to be no loss at the time of
purchase and the payment can be deferred. This could lead to
overspending. Also, in saving, some might stash cash away under
the mattress,
ignoring the interest earnings from a savings
account. Other possible behaviors could be funding a low-interest
savings account while carrying high-interest debt.

Research implications. Further research can address several
issues or limitations. First, since ethnic Chinese young adults did
not participate in this study, their inclusion in future research
would facilitate a more comprehensive investigation. As young
adults, they likely share similarities, such as spending philoso-
phies, self-learning about ﬁnancial information, and exposure to
potential scams. However, differences may also exist in certain
areas. The use of external restraint and personal hacks in ﬁnancial
matters, such as strong roles of parents and boyfriends in mon-
itoring spending, and stashing cash away was less commonly
observed among Chinese young adults. Informal borrowing and
property investment in their home country were also unique
characteristics of ethnic minority young adults. Further research
can conﬁrm these possibilities.

12

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

ARTICLE

Second, this study may not fully reﬂect the situation of
ethnic minority young adults with a lower socio-economic
status. This is because the sample was generally well educated,
as half of the participants had an undergraduate degree, and
almost one-ﬁfth educated to secondary education. In addition,
the interviews were conducted in English, indicating a good
the language among the participants. Future
command of
research may include those who are less socioeconomically
advantaged as they may have different mechanisms surround-
ing ﬁnancial decision-making.

Third, the relative inﬂuence of parents and peers across life
stages, as well as differences in intrapersonal characteristics as
facilitating factors between ethnic minority and non-ethnic
minority young people, can be investigated to offer insights into
tailored ﬁnancial literacy education.

Moreover, we acknowledge the limitation of small sample size
in a qualitative study, which aims to reveal themes for the
ﬁnancial
literacy of ethnic minority young adults, an under-
examined group. A future quantitative study for a larger
population will be needed to allow for a broader generalization.

Conclusion
This study examined ﬁnancial decision-making among ethnic
minority young adults in Hong Kong and identiﬁed major enabling
factors for their ﬁnancial decision-making. Ethnic minority young
adults employed strategies for budgeting, but they also found
budgeting challenging. They had various spending philosophies,
while basic needs were mostly a priority. Saving at least one-third of
their income was common, and they had long-term ﬁnancial
planning goals. They used ﬁnancial products both in Hong Kong
and their home countries. Informal borrowing was common,
despite some turning to other sources of loans. One-third used
credit cards, incurring occasional risks. They were aware of scams
and employed protective tactics, but still fell victim to scams.

intrapersonal

characteristics,

social dynamics

Enabling factors to ﬁnancial decisions included family social
factors,
capital,
knowledge proﬁciency, and facilitative contextual circumstances. To
enhance ﬁnancial decision-making among ethnic minority young
adults, the following can be considered. First, leveraging parental
inﬂuence by involving them in ﬁnancial education efforts. Second,
fostering positive ﬁnancial attitudes alongside increasing ﬁnancial
knowledge for a holistic ﬁnancial education. Third, optimizing peer
inﬂuence through collaborative learning and peer mentoring and
raising awareness about community trust and potential issues with
informal borrowing. Fourth, covering ﬁnancial concepts for every-
day ﬁnancial decision-making and mental accounting bias, as well as
practical knowledge for fraud prevention. Fifth, capitalizing on pre-
employment and post-pandemic periods for timely ﬁnancial edu-
cation. Sixth, developing tailored digital tools and language support
for speciﬁc ethnic communities. Finally, conducting further research
is necessary. This includes the inclusion of ethnic Chinese and ethnic
minority young people from various socioeconomic backgrounds
and investigating the relative importance of parental and peer
inﬂuence across different age groups. Moreover, comparing the
intrapersonal characteristics as facilitating factors between ethnic
minority and non-ethnic minority young people and expanding
studies to include a larger population to enable generalization are
also important.

Received: 15 November 2023; Accepted: 15 August 2024;

Notes
1 Information in parentheses denotes participant ID with ethnicity, gender and age,

status as studying or working (S or W), and educational level, respectively. Education
level may refer to the level of secondary school (e.g., S6), sub-degree (SD), Bachelor’s
degree (Degree), or Master’s degree (Master’s).

2 An Octopus card is a rechargeable card that can be used on public transport and in

convenience stores in Hong Kong.

References
Akben-Selcuk E (2015) Factors inﬂuencing college students’ ﬁnancial behaviors in
Turkey: Evidence from a national survey. Int J Econ Financ 7(6):87–94.
https://doi.org/10.5539/ijef.v7n6p87

Al-Bahrani A, Weathers J, Patel D (2019) Racial differences in the returns to
ﬁnancial literacy education. J Consum Aff 53(2):572–599. https://doi.org/10.
1111/joca.12205

Almenberg J, Dreber A (2015) Gender, stock market participation and ﬁnancial
literacy. Econ Lett 137:140–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2015.10.009
American Psychological Association (2023) APA dictionary of psychology. American
Psychological Association. https://dictionary.apa.org/self-discipline. Accessed 21
Oct 2023

Angrisani M, Barrera S, Blanco LR, Contreras S (2021) The racial/ethnic gap in
ﬁnancial literacy in the population and by income. Contemp Econ Policy
39(3):524–536. https://doi.org/10.1111/coep.12507

Atkinson A, Messy FA (2012) Measuring ﬁnancial literacy: Results of the OECD/
International Network on Financial Education (INFE) pilot study. OECD
Working Papers on Finance, Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 15, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5k9csfs90fr4-en

Barcellos SH, Zamarro G (2021) Unbanked status and use of alternative ﬁnancial
services among minority populations. J Pension Econ Financ 20(4):468–481.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1474747219000052

Braun V, Clarke V (2006) Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol

3(2):77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa

Brown M, Graf R (2013) Financial literacy and retirement planning in Switzerland.

Numeracy 6(2):2–23. https://doi.org/10.5038/1936-4660.6.2.6

Bucher-Koenen T, Lusardi A (2011) Financial literacy and retirement planning in
Germany. J Pension Econ Financ 10(4):565–584. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S147474211000485

Census and Statistics Department (2017) Hong Kong 2016 Population by-census -
thematic report: Ethnic minorities. Census and Statistics Department, Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region. https://www.censtatd.gov.hk/en/data/
stat_report/product/B1120100/att/B11201002016XXXXB0100.pdf. Accessed
3 Oct 2023

Census and Statistics Department (2022) Population census, Thematic Report:
Ethnic Minorities. Census and Statistics Department, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region.
https://www.censtatd.gov.hk/en/data/stat_report/
product/B1120111/att/B11201112021XXXXB0100.pdf. Accessed 3 Oct 2023
Chan TMS, Chan BK, Cho EYN, Chan YM (2020) A study on education and career
pathways of ethnic minority youth in Hong Kong. Equal Opportunities
Commission and Centre for Youth Research and Practice, Hong Kong
Baptist University, Hong Kong. https://www.eoc.org.hk/EOC/upload/
ResearchReport/20200619_em.pdf. Accessed 10 Oct 2023

Danes SM (1994) Parental perceptions of children’s ﬁnancial socialization. J Financ

Counseling Plan 5:127–149

de Bassa Scheresberg C (2013) Financial literacy and ﬁnancial behavior among
young adults: evidence and implications. Numeracy 6(2):5. https://doi.org/10.
5038/1936-4660.6.2.5

Deuﬂhard F, Georgarakos D, Inderst R (2019) Financial

literacy and savings
account returns. J Eur Econ Assoc 17(1):131–164. https://doi.org/10.1093/
jeea/jvy003

Ekanem I (2013) Inﬂuences on the behaviour of black and minority ethnic (BME)
J Consum Stud

communities
37(2):199–205. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1470-6431.2012.01104.x

and bankruptcy.

towards debt

Int

Data availability
The data analysed during this study are not publicly available to
protect research participant privacy but are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Engels C, Kumar K, Philip D (2020) Financial literacy and fraud detection. Eur J
Financ 26(4-5):420–442. https://doi.org/10.1080/1351847X.2019.1646666
Furstenberg FF, Kaplan SB (2004) Social capital and the family. In Scott, J. Treas, J.,
& Richards, M. (eds.), The Blackwell companion to the sociology of families
(pp. 218–232). Blackwell Publishing, Oxford

Gaur SS, Supramaniam S, Yap SF, Foliaki M (2020) Consumption of ﬁnancial
products amongst vulnerable paciﬁc island people in New Zealand. J Consum
Mark 37(7):833–842. https://doi.org/10.1108/JCM-10-2018-2912

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

13

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

Goodstein RM, Lloro A, Rhine SL, Weinstein JM (2021) What accounts for racial
and ethnic differences in credit use? J Consum Aff 55(2):389–416. https://doi.
org/10.1111/joca.12343

Gough O, Adami R (2013) Saving for retirement: a review of ethnic minorities in the
UK. Soc Policy Soc 12(1):147–161. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1474746412000516
Goyal K, Kumar S (2021) Financial literacy: a systematic review and bibliometric
analysis. Int J Consum Stud 45(1):80–105. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijcs.12605
literacy improve
ﬁnancial inclusion? Cross country evidence. World Dev 111:84–96. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2018.06.020

Grohmann A, Klühs T, Menkhoff L (2018) Does ﬁnancial

Herd P, Holden K, Su YT (2012) The links between early‐life cognition and
schooling and late‐life ﬁnancial knowledge. J Consum Aff 46(3):411–435.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6606.2012.01235.x

Hilgert M, Hogarth J, Beverly S (2003) Household ﬁnancial management: the
connection between knowledge and behavior. Fed Reserve Bull 89:309–322
Hung AA, Parker AM, Yoong JK (2009) Deﬁning and measuring ﬁnancial literacy.
Working Paper WR-708, Rand Corporation, Santa Monica. https://www.
rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/working_papers/2009/RAND_WR708.pdf.
Accessed 3 Oct 2023

Investor Education Centre (2015). A review of ﬁnancial education initiatives in
Hong Kong. Retrieved from https://www.ifec.org.hk/common/pdf/about_iec/
IEC-Research-Review-Financial-Education-Initiatives-HK-2015.pdf

Investor Education Centre (2018) Financial

literacy monitor. Retrieved from

https://www.ifec.org.hk/common/pdf/about_iec/iec-ﬁnancial-literacy-
monitor-2018.pdf

John RD (1999) Consumer socialization of children: a retrospective look at twenty-
ﬁve years of research. J Consum Res 26(3):182–213. https://doi.org/10.1086/
209559

Johnson E, Sherraden MS (2007) From ﬁnancial literacy to ﬁnancial capability
among youth. J Sociol Soc Welf 34(3):119–146. https://doi.org/10.15453/
0191-5096.3276

Kaiser T, Menkhoff L (2020) Financial education in schools: a meta-analysis of
experimental studies. Econ Educ Rev 78:101930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
econedurev.2019.101930

Kelley HH, LeBaron AB, Hill EJ (2021) Family matters: decade review from Journal
of Family and Economic Issues. J Fam Econ Issues 42(Suppl 1):20–33. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10834-020-09706-8

Kempson E (2009) Framework for the development of ﬁnancial literacy baseline
surveys: A ﬁrst international comparative analysis. OECD Working Papers
on Finance, Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 1, OECD Publishing, Paris.
https://doi.org/10.1787/5kmddpz7m9zq-en

Mahdavi M, Horton NJ (2014) Financial knowledge among educated women:
room for improvement. J Consum Aff 48(2):403–417. https://doi.org/10.
1111/joca.12032

Mottola GR (2013) In our best interest: Women, ﬁnancial literacy, and credit card
behavior. Numeracy 6(2):1–15. https://doi.org/10.5038/1936-4660.6.2.4
Muir K, Hamilton M, Noone JH, Marjolin A, Salignac F, Saunders P (2017) Exploring
ﬁnancial well-being in the Australian context. Centre for Social Impact & Social
Policy Research Centre – University of New South Wales Sydney, for Financial
Literacy Australia. https://doi.org/10.26190/unsworks/26355

Nembhard JG (2013) Community development credit unions: securing and pro-
tecting as sets in black communities. Rev Black Political Econ 40(4):459–490.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12114-013-9166-6

Norvilitis JM, Merwin MM, Osberg TM, Roehling PV, Young P, Kamas MM
(2006) Personality factors, money attitudes, ﬁnancial knowledge, and credit-
card debt in college students. J Appl Soc Psychol 36(6):1395–1413. https://
psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1111/j.0021-9029.2006.00065.x

Nurmi JE (1991) How do adolescents see their future? A review of the development
of future orientation and planning. Dev Rev 11(1):1–59. https://psycnet.apa.
org/doi/10.1016/0273-2297(91)90002-6

OECD (2014) PISA 2012 results: Students and money: Financial literacy skills for
the 21st century (Volume VI). OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.
1787/9789264208094-en

OECD (2015a) National strategies for ﬁnancial education. OECD/INFE policy
handbook. OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/a8916d0e-en

OECD (2015b) 2015 OECD/INFE toolkit for measuring ﬁnancial

literacy and
inclusion. OECD Publishing, Paris. https://www.academia.edu/
Accessed

ﬁnancial
35742219/OECD_INFE_Toolkit_Measuring_Financial_Literacy.
20 Sep 2023

Perry VG, Morris MD (2005) Who is in control? The role of self‐perception,
knowledge, and income in explaining consumer ﬁnancial behavior. J Consum
Aff 39(2):299–313. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1111/j.1745-6606.2005.00016.x

Robbins SP, Judge TA (2022) Organizational behavior. Pearson, Harlow
Shanbhag A (2022) Exploring causes, effects, and solutions to ﬁnancial illiteracy
and exclusion among minority demographic groups. arXiv.org. https://arxiv.
org/abs/2210.11403

Strathman A, Gleicher F, Boninger DS, Edwards CS (1994) The consideration of
future consequences: Weighing immediate and distant outcomes of behavior.
J Personal Soc Psychol 66(4):742–752. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/
0022-3514.66.4.742

Thaler R (1985) Mental accounting and consumer choice. Mark Sci 4(3):199–214.

https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.4.3.199

Kim J, Kim JE, Moon UJ (2016) Differences in bank account ownership among
White, Black, and Latino children and young adults. J Financ Counseling
Plan 27(2):212–230. https://doi.org/10.1891/1052-3073.27.2.212

van Rooij M, Lusardi A, Alessie R (2011a) Financial

literacy and retirement
planning in the Netherlands. J Econ Psychol 32(4):593–608. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.joep.2011.02.004

Kim KT, Cho SH, DeVaney SA (2021) Racial/ethnic differences in holding a
J Consum Aff
saving motive: a decomposition analysis.

retirement
55(2):464–482. https://doi.org/10.1111/joca.12338

van Rooij M, Lusardi A, Alessie R (2011b) Financial literacy and stock market
participation. J Financ Econ 101(2):449–472. https://doi.org/10.3386/w13565
Waitley D (2010) Psychology of success: ﬁnding meaning in work and life (5th ed.).

Kim KT, Lee J (2018) Financial literacy and use of payday loans in the United
States. Appl Econ Lett 25(11):781–784. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851.
2017.1366635

Klapper LF, Lusardi A, Panos GA (2012) Financial literacy and the ﬁnancial crisis
(No. w17930). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/
papers/w17930

Klapper L, Panos GA (2011) Financial literacy and retirement planning: the Rus-
sian case. J Pension Econ Financ 10(4):599–618. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1474747211000503

Lusardi A (2005) Financial education and the saving behavior of African American
and Hispanic households. Report for the US Department of Labor. https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/254496068_Financial_Education_and_
the_Saving_Behavior_of_African-American_and_Hispanic_Households.
Accessed 20 Sep 2023

Lusardi AM (2019) Financial literacy and the need for ﬁnancial education: evidence
and implications. Swiss J Econ Stat 155(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s41937-019-0027-5

Lusardi A, Mitchell OS (2007) Baby boomer retirement security: the roles of
J Monetary Econ.

literacy, and housing wealth.

planning, ﬁnancial
54(1):205–224. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.933601

Lusardi A, Mitchell OS (2011a) Financial literacy around the world: an overview. J
Pension Econ Financ 10(4):497–508. https://doi.org/10.3386/w17107
Lusardi A, Mitchell OS (2011b) Financial literacy and retirement planning in the
United States. J Pension Econ Financ 10(4):509–525. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S147474721100045X

Lusardi A, Tufano P (2015) Debt

Lusardi A, Mitchell OS, Curto V (2010) Financial literacy among the young. J
Consum Aff 44(2):358–380. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6606.2010.01173.x
literacy, ﬁnancial experiences, and over-
indebtedness. J Pension Econ Financ 14(4):332–368. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1474747215000232

McGraw Hill Higher Education, Boston

Worthington AC (2006) Predicting ﬁnancial literacy in Australia. Financ Serv Rev

15:59–79

Xiao JJ, Chen C, Chen F (2014) Consumer ﬁnancial capability and ﬁnancial
satisfaction. Soc Indic Res 118(1):415–432. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-
013-0414-8

Yao R, Sharpe DL, Gorham EE (2011) An exploratory study of Chinese Americans’
debt ownership. J Fam Econ Issues 32:600–611. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10834-011-9271-2

Zuhair S, Wickremasinghe G, Natoli R (2015) Migrants and self-reported ﬁnancial
literacy. Int J Soc Econ 42(4):368–386. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSE-09-2013-
0203

Acknowledgements
The research project was funded by the Investor and Financial Education Council in
Hong Kong while the author was working at Hong Kong Baptist University. The research
was conducted at that time. This paper was supported by the Children and Youth
Research Centre and an Institutional Development Grant of Saint Francis University,
Hong Kong, following the author’s transition to the new position at that university.

Author contributions
The author contributed to the study conception and design, fund acquisition, investi-
gation, data analysis, supervision, and writing up of the study.

Competing interests
The author declares no competing interests.

14

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

ARTICLE

Ethical approval
This research was conducted in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Approval was granted by the Research Ethics Committee of Hong Kong Baptist Uni-
versity (project code: REC/19-20/0529) when the author was working there.

Informed consent
All research participants provided informed consent before joining the study.

Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Esther Yin-Nei Cho.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed
the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

© The Author(s) 2024

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |

 (2024) 11:1113  | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03605-1

15

